  <chapter id="rnfb210-apiods">
    <chapterinfo>
      <title>Changes to the Firebird API and ODS</title>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">as at Release 2.1</emphasis></para>
    </chapterinfo>
    
    <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api" xreflabel="API Extensions"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>API (Application Programming Interface)</title>
    <para>Some needed changes have been performed in the Firebird API.  They include.-</para>
    
    <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-dpb212">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>User Restrictions in the DPB</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="vi">From v.2.1.2 onward</emphasis>Several DPB parameters have been made inaccessible to ordinary users, closing some dangerous loopholes.  In some cases, they are settings that would alter the database header settings and potentially cause corruptions if not performed under administrator control;  in others, they initiate operations that are otherwise restricted to the SYSDBA. They are.-</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_shutdown and isc_dpb_online</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_gbak_attach, isc_dpb_gfix_attach and isc_dpb_gstat_attach</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_verify</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_no_db_triggers</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_set_db_sql_dialect</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_sweep_interval</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_force_write</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_no_reserve</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_set_db_readonly</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_set_page_buffers (on Superserver)</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>The parameter <filename>isc_dpb_set_page_buffers</filename> can still be used by ordinary users on Classic and it will set the buffer size temporarily for that user and that session only.  When used by the SYSDBA on either Superserver or Classic, it will change the buffer count in the database header, i.e., make a permanent change to the default buffer size.</para>
      <important>
        <title>Important Note for Developers and Users of Data Access Drivers and Tools</title>
          <para>This change will affect any of the listed DPB parameters that have been explicitly set, either by including them in the DPB implementation by default property values or by enabling them in tools and applications that access databases as ordinary users.  For example, a Delphi application that included 'RESERVE PAGE SPACE=TRUE' and 'FORCED WRITES=TRUE' in its database Params property, which caused no problems when the application connected to Firebird 1.x, 2.0.x or 2.1.0/2.1.1, now rejects a connection by a non-SYSDBA user with ISC ERROR CODE 335544788, <quote>Unable to perform operation. You must be either SYSDBA or owner of the database.</quote></para>
        </important>
      </section>


      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-cleanup">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Cleanup of ibase.h</title>
        <author><firstname>D. Yemanov,</firstname><surname>A. Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>

      <para>The API header file, ibase.h has been subjected to a cleanup. with the result that public headers no
      longer contain private declarations.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-lock-timeout"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Lock Timeout for WAIT Transactions</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Karyakin, D. Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The new feature extends the WAIT mode by making provision to set a finite time interval to wait for the
      concurrent transactions. If the timeout has passed, an error (isc_lock_timeout) is reported.</para>

      <para>Timeout intervals can now be specified per transaction, using the new TPB constant
      <firstterm>isc_tpb_lock_timeout</firstterm> in the API.</para>
      <note>
        <para>The DSQL equivalent is implemented via the <firstterm>LOCK TIMEOUT &lt;value&gt;</firstterm> clause
        of the SET TRANSACTION statement.</para>
      </note>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-info"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>isc_dsql_sql_info() Now Includes Relation Aliases</title>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The function call isc_dsql_sql_info() has been extended to enable relation aliases to be retrieved, if
      required.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-blobinfo"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Enhancement to isc_blob_lookup_desc()</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>isc_blob_lookup_desc() now also describes blobs that are outputs of stored procedures</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-cli-vers"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>API Identifies Client Version</title>
        <author><firstname>N.</firstname><surname>Samofatov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The macro definition <literal>FB_API_VER</literal> is added to ibase.h to indicate the current API
      version. The number corresponds to the appropriate Firebird version.</para>
      <para>The current value of FB_API_VER is 20 (two-digit equivalent of 2.0). This macro can be used by
      client applications to check the version of ibase.h its being compiled with.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-dbinfo"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Additions to the isc_database_info() Structure</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
        <para>The following items have been added to the isc_database_info() function call structure:</para>

        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-dbinfo-trcount"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_active_tran_count</title>
          <para>Returns the number of currently active transactions.</para>
        </section>
        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-dbinfo-crdate"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_creation_date</title>
          <para>Returns the date and time when the database was [re]created.</para>
          <para>To decode the returned value, call &nbsp;<literal>isc_vax_integer</literal>&nbsp; twice to
          extract (first) the date and (second) the time portions of the ISC_TIMESTAMP. Then, use
          &nbsp;<literal>isc_decode_timestamp()</literal>&nbsp; as usual.</para>
        </section>

      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Additions to the isc_transaction_info() Structure</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
        <para>The following items have been added to the isc_transaction_info() function call structure:</para>

        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo-oit"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_tra_oldest_interesting</title>
          <para>Returns the number of the oldest [interesting] transaction when the current transaction started.
          For snapshot transactions, this is also the number of the oldest transaction in the private copy of the
          transaction inventory page (TIP).</para>
        </section>
        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo-oat"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_tra_oldest_active</title>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>For a read-committed transaction, returns the number of the current transaction.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>For all other transactions, returns the number of the oldest active transaction when the current
              transaction started.</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </section>
        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo-osnap"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_tra_oldest_snapshot</title>
          <para>Returns the number of the lowest &nbsp;<literal>tra_oldest_active</literal>&nbsp; of all
          transactions that were active when the current transaction started.</para>
          <note>
            <para>This value is used as the threshold (&quot;high-water mark&quot;) for garbage collection.</para>
          </note>
        </section>
        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo-isol"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_tra_isolation</title>
          <para>Returns the isolation level of the current transaction.  The format of the returned clumplets
          is:</para>
          <programlisting>
isc_info_tra_isolation,
  1, isc_info_tra_consistency | isc_info_tra_concurrency |
  2, isc_info_tra_read_committed,
     isc_info_tra_no_rec_version | isc_info_tra_rec_version
          </programlisting>
          <para>That is, for Read Committed transactions, two items are returned (isolation level and record
          versioning policy) while, for other transactions, one item is returned (isolation level).</para>
        </section>
        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo-access"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_tra_access</title>
          <para>Returns the access mode (read-only or read-write) of the current transaction.  The format of the
          returned clumplets is:</para>
        <programlisting>
isc_info_tra_access, 1, isc_info_tra_readonly | isc_info_tra_readwrite
        </programlisting>
        </section>
        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-trinfo-timeout"><!-- Level 3 section -->
          <title>isc_info_tra_lock_timeout</title>
          <para>Returns the lock timeout set for the current transaction.</para>
        </section>

      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-srvcs"><!-- Level 2 section -->
        <title>Improved Services API</title>
        <para>The following improvements have been added to the Services API:</para>

        <section id="rnfb210-apiods-api-wintrust" xreflabel="isc_spb_trusted_auth"><!-- sect3 -->
          <title>Parameter isc_spb_trusted_auth </title>
            <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1, ODS 11.1)</emphasis> <filename>isc_spb_trusted_auth</filename> 
            applies only to Windows and is used to force Firebird to use Windows trusted authentication for the
            requested service.</para>
        </section><!-- sect3 -->
        
        <section id="rnfb210-apiods-api-dbname" xreflabel="isc_spb_dbname"><!-- sect3 -->
        <title>Parameter isc_spb_dbname</title>
          <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1, ODS 11.1)</emphasis> For any services related to the security
          database, provides the ability to supply the name of the security database when invoking a security 
          service remotely.  It is equivalent to supplying the <filename>-database</filename> switch when calling 
          the <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> utility remotely.</para>
        </section><!-- sect2 -->

        <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-srvcs-opt">
          <sectioninfo>
            <title>Task Execution Optimized</title>
            <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
          </sectioninfo>
          <para>Services are now executed as threads rather than processes on some threadable CS builds (currently 32-
          bit Windows and Solaris).</para>
        </section>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-interprete"><!-- Level 2 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>New Function for Delivering Error Text</title>
          <author><firstname>C.</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname></author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>The new function <literal>&nbsp;fb_interpret()&nbsp;</literal> replaces the former
        isc_interprete() for extracting the text for a Firebird error message from the error status vector to a
        client buffer.</para>
        <important>
          <para>isc_interprete() is vulnerable to overruns and is deprecated as unsafe.  The new function should be
          used instead.</para>
        </important>
      </section>
      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-api-dpb-shutdown" xreflabel="Shutdown State in the API"><!-- Level 2 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>Accommodation of New Shutdown &lt;state&gt; Parameters</title>
          <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>API Access to database shutdown is through flags appended to the isc_dpb_shutdown parameter
      in the DBP argument passed to isc_attach_database().  The symbols for the &lt;state&gt; flags are:</para>
        <programlisting>
#define isc_dpb_shut_cache               0x1
#define isc_dpb_shut_attachment          0x2
#define isc_dpb_shut_transaction         0x4
#define isc_dpb_shut_force               0x8
#define isc_dpb_shut_mode_mask          0x70

#define isc_dpb_shut_default             0x0
#define isc_dpb_shut_normal             0x10
#define isc_dpb_shut_multi              0x20
#define isc_dpb_shut_single             0x30
#define isc_dpb_shut_full               0x40
        </programlisting>

        <para><emphasis role="bold">Example of Use in C/C++</emphasis></para>
        <programlisting>
char dpb_buffer[256], *dpb, *p;
ISC_STATUS status_vector[ISC_STATUS_LENGTH];
isc_db_handle handle = NULL;

dpb = dpb_buffer;

*dpb++ = isc_dpb_version1;

const char* user_name = <quote>SYSDBA</quote>;
const int user_name_length = strlen(user_name);
*dpb++ = isc_dpb_user_name;
*dpb++ = user_name_length;
memcpy(dpb, user_name, user_name_length);
dpb += user_name_length;

const char* user_password = <quote>masterkey</quote>;
const int user_password_length = strlen(user_password);
*dpb++ = isc_dpb_password;
*dpb++ = user_password_length;
memcpy(dpb, user_password, user_password_length);
dpb += user_password_length;

// Force an immediate full database shutdown
*dpb++ = isc_dpb_shutdown;
*dpb++ = 1;   <!-- inserted v.2.1.2 -->
*dpb++ = isc_dpb_shut_force | isc_dpb_shut_full;

const int dpb_length = dpb - dpb_buffer;

isc_attach_database(status_vector,
                    0, <quote>employee.db</quote>,
                    &amp;handle,
                    dpb_length, dpb_buffer);

if (status_vector[0] == 1 &amp;&amp; status_vector[1])
{
  isc_print_status(status_vector);
}
else
{
  isc_detach_database(status_vector, &amp;handle);
}
        </programlisting>
      </section>

    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods" xreflabel="ODS Changes"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>ODS (On-Disk Structure) Changes</title>
    <para>On-disk structure (ODS) changes include the following:</para>
      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-number"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>New ODS Number</title>
      <para>Firebird 2.0 creates databases with an ODS (On-Disk Structure) version of 11.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-except-msgs"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Size limit for exception messages increased</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Maximum size of exception messages raised from 78 to 1021 bytes.</para>
      </section>
      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-generator-description"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>New Description Field for Generators</title>
        <author><firstname>C.</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Added RDB$DESCRIPTION to RDB$GENERATORS, so now you can include description text when creating
      generators.</para>
       </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-role-description"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>New Description Field for SQL Roles</title>
        <author><firstname>C.</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Added RDB$DESCRIPTION and RDB$SYSTEM_FLAG to RDB$ROLES to allow description text and to flag
      user-defined roles, respectively.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-type"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title><quote>ODS Type</quote> Recognition</title>
        <author><firstname>N.</firstname><surname>Samofatov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Introduced a concept of ODS type to distinguish between InterBase and Firebird databases.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-dsqlerror"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Smarter DSQL Error Reporting</title>
        <author><firstname>C.</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The DSQL parser will now try to report the line and column number of an incomplete statement.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-apiods-ods-rdbstatistics"><!-- Level 2 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>New Column in RDB$Index_Segments</title>
            <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov, A. Brinkman</surname></author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>A new column RDB$STATISTICS has been added to the system table RDB$INDEX_SEGMENTS to store the
        per-segment selectivity values for multi-key indexes.</para>
        <note>
          <para>The column of the same name in RDB$INDICES is kept for compatibility and still represents the total
          index selectivity, that is used for a full index match.</para>
        </note>
      </section>

    </section>
  </chapter>

