  <chapter id="rnfb210-fbconf">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>New Configuration Parameters and Changes</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  
    <section id="rnfb210-fbconf-authent" xreflabel="Authentication"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Authentication</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> On Windows server platforms, from V.2.1 forward, 
      <firstterm>Authentication</firstterm> is used for configuring the server authentication mode if you need it to 
      be other than the default <emphasis>mixed</emphasis>.</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><emphasis>trusted</emphasis> makes use of Windows <quote>trusted authentication</quote> which, under 
          the right conditions, may be the most secure way to authenticate on Windows.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para><emphasis>native</emphasis> sets the traditional Firebird server authentication mode, requiring users to
          log in using a user name and password defined in the security database.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para><emphasis>mixed</emphasis> allows both.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-fbconf-relax" xreflabel="RelaxedAliasChecking"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>RelaxedAliasChecking</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> <firstterm>RelaxedAliasChecking</firstterm> is a new
      configuration parameter added to permit a slight relaxation of the Firebird 2.0.x restrictions on mixing
      relation aliases and table names in a query.  For example, with RelaxedAliasChecking set to true (=1) in
      firebird.conf, the following query will succeed in Firebird 2.1, whereas it would fail in v.2.0.x, or in
      v.2.1 with the parameter set to its default of 0:</para>
      <programlisting>
SELECT ATABLE.FIELD1, B.FIELD2
  FROM ATABLE A JOIN BTABLE B
  ON A.ID = BTABLE.ID
      </programlisting>
      <caution>
        <para>Understand that this is a <emphasis>temporary facility</emphasis> whose purpose is to provide some
        headspace for migrating systems using legacy code that exploited the tolerance of InterBase and older
        Firebird server versions to non-standard SQL usage.</para>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>Don't enable this parameter if you have no <quote>offending</quote> code in your
            applications or PSQL modules.  It is not intended as an invitation to write sloppy code!</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>Regard it as a time-bomb.  It will be permanently removed from a future release.</para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </caution>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-fbconf-fscache" xreflabel="MaxFileSystemCache"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>MaxFileSystemCache</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> Sets a threshold determining whether Firebird will 
      allow the page cache to be duplicated to the filesystem cache or not.  If this parameter is set to 
      any (integer) value greater than zero, its effect depends on the current default size of the page cache:  
      if the default page cache (in pages) is less than the value of MaxFileSystemCache (in pages) then filesystem 
      caching is enabled, otherwise it is disabled.</para>
      <note>
        <para>This applies both when the page cache buffer size is set implicitly by the
        DefaultDBCachePages setting or explicitly as a database header attribute.</para>
      </note>
      <para>Thus, </para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>To disable filesystem caching always, set MaxFileSystemCache to zero</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>To enable filesystem caching always, set MaxFileSystemCache an integer value that is
          sufficiently large to exceed the size of the database page cache.  Remember that the effect of
          this value will be affected by subsequent changes to the page cache size.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <important>
        <para>The default setting for MaxFileSystemCache is 65536 pages, i.e. filesystem caching is
        enabled.</para>
      </important>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-fbconf-dbgrowth" xreflabel="DatabaseGrowthIncrement"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>DatabaseGrowthIncrement</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> For better control of disk space preallocation, the new 
      parameter <firstterm>DatabaseGrowthIncrement</firstterm> has been added to <filename>firebird.conf</filename>.  
      It represents the upper limit for the size, <emphasis>in bytes</emphasis>, of the chunk of disk that will
      be requested for preallocation as pages for writes from the cache.  Default: 134,217,728 bytes (128 MB).</para>

      <para>For background information, please refer to the topic <xref linkend="rnfb210-global-dskchunk"/> in
      the chapter <quote>Global Improvements in Firebird 2.1</quote>.</para>

      <para>When the engine needs to initialize more disk space, it allocates a block that is 1/16th
      of the space already allocated, but not less than 128 KB and not greater than the DatabaseGrowthIncrement
      value. The DatabaseGrowthIncrement value can be raised to increase the maximum size of newly-allocated blocks
      to more than the default 128 MB. Set it to zero to disable preallocation.</para>
      <note>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
          <!-- TRANSLATORS, please note a typo was fixed in the following line:  128 KB, not 128 MB. -->
            <para>The lower limit of the block size is purposely hard-coded at 128 KB and
            cannot be reconfigured.</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>Space is not preallocated for database shadow files.</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>Preallocation is disabled for a database that has the <quote>No
            reserve</quote> option set.</para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-externalfileaccess"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>ExternalFileAccess</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Modified in Firebird 2, to allow the first path cited in ExternalFilesAccess to be used as the default
    when a new external file is created.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-legacyhash"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>LegacyHash</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>This parameter enables you to configure Firebird 2 to reject an old DES hash always in an upgraded
    security database. If you don't use the security database upgrade procedure, this parameter does not affect
    Firebird operation. A DES hash cannot arrive in the new security2.fdb.</para>
    <para>Refer to the <xref linkend="rnfb20x-sec-new-db-upgrade"/> Security section for instructions on upgrading your
    existing Firebird 1.5 security.fdb (or a renamed isc4.gdb) to the new security database layout.</para>
    <para>The default value is 1 (true).</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-redirection" xreflabel="Redirection"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Redirection</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Parameter for controlling redirection of remote requests.  It controls the multi-hop capability that was
    broken in InterBase 6 and is restored in Firebird 2.</para>
      <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-redirection-multihop">
      <title>About Multi-hop</title>
      <para>When you attach to some database using multiple hosts in the connection string, only the last host in
      this list is the one that opens the database.  The other hosts act as intermediate gateways on port gds_db.
      Previously, when working, this feature was available unconditionally. Now, it can be configured.</para>
      <para>Remote redirection is turned <emphasis>off</emphasis> by default.</para>
      <caution>
        <para>If you are considering enabling multi-hop capability, please study
        the <xref linkend="rnfb20x-sec-summary-vulner"/> text in the chapter on Security and in the documentation for this
        parameter in the firebird.conf file.</para>
      </caution>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-gcpolicy"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>GCPolicy</title>
      <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Garbage collection policy.  It is now possible to choose the policy for garbage collection on SuperServer.
    The possible settings are cooperative, background and combined, as explained in the notes for
    <function>GPolicy</function> in <function>firebird.conf</function>.</para>

    <para>Not applicable to Classic, which supports only cooperative garbage collection.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-oldolumnnaming"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>OldColumnNaming</title>
      <author><firstname>P.</firstname><surname>Reeves</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>The parameter OldColumnNaming has been ported forward from Firebird 1.5.3.  This parameter allows users to
    revert to pre-V1.5 column naming behaviour in SELECT expressions.  The installation default is 0 (disabled).  If
    it is enabled, the engine will not attempt to supply run-time identifiers, e.g. CONCATENATION for derived fields
    where the developer has neglected to provide identifiers.</para>
    <important>
      <para>This setting affects all databases on the server and will potentially produce exceptions or
      unpredicted results where mixed applications are implemented.</para>
    </important>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-usepriorityscheduler"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>UsePriorityScheduler</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Setting this parameter to zero now disables switching of thread priorities completely.  It affects only
    the Win32 SuperServer.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-tcpnonagle"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>TCPNoNagle has changed</title>
      <author><firstname>K.</firstname><surname>Kuznetzov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>The default value for TcpNoNagle is now TCP_NODELAY.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-removed"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <title>Removed or Deprecated Parameters</title>
      <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-removed-crtintwindow"><!-- Level 2 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>CreateInternalWindow</title>
          <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>The option CreateInternalWindow is no longer required to run multiple server instances
          and it has been removed.</para>
      </section><!-- sect2 -->

      <section id="rnfb20x-fbconf-deadthreadscollection"><!-- Level 1 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>DeadThreadsCollection is no longer used</title>
          <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>The DeadThreadsCollection parameter is no longer used at all.  Dead threads are now efficiently
        released &quot;on the fly&quot;, making configuration unnecessary. Firebird 2.0 silently ignores
        this parameter.</para>
      </section><!-- sect2 -->

    </section><!-- sect1 -->
</chapter>