<chapter id="rnfb210-psql">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Procedural SQL (PSQL)</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>A handful of improvements was added to the collection of PSQL extensions that came
  with Firebird 2.  The highlights are new capabilities to use domains and collation sequences
  when declaring variables and arguments in procedures and triggers.  </para>

  <section id="rnfb210-psql-links"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Quick Links</title>
    <itemizedlist spacing="compact">
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb210-domainspsql"/><!-- Domains in PSQL --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb210-psql-collt"/><!-- COLLATE in Stored Procedures --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb210-psql-views-currof"/><!-- WHERE CURRENT OF for Views --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-context-rowcount"/><!-- ROW_COUNT Counts Rows Returned by SELECT --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-cursors"/><!-- Explicit Cursors --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-default-args"/><!-- Stored Procedure Arguments Can Take Defaults --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-leave-label"/><!-- LEAVE &lt;label&gt; Flow Control Operator --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-old"/><!-- OLD Variables Now Read-only --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-stacktrace"/><!-- Stack Trace for PSQL Exceptions --></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><xref linkend="rnfb20x-psql-udfcall"/><!-- Call UDFs as Procedures --></para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <section id="rnfb210-domainspsql" xreflabel="Domains in PSQL"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
      <title>Domains in PSQL</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
          <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> It is now possible to use a domain when declaring 
      the data types of arguments and variables in PSQL modules.  Depending on your requirements, you can 
      declare the argument or variable using </para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>the domain identifier alone, in lieu of the native data type identifier, to have
          the variable inherit all of the attributes of the domain; or</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>the data type of the domain, without inheriting CHECK constraints and the DEFAULT
          value (if declared in the domain), by including the <filename>TYPE OF</filename> keyword
          in the declaration (see the syntax below)</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
data_type ::=
    &lt;builtin_data_type&gt;
    | &lt;domain_name&gt;
    | TYPE OF &lt;domain_name&gt;
      </programlisting>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
CREATE DOMAIN DOM AS INTEGER;

CREATE PROCEDURE SP (
  I1 TYPE OF DOM,
  I2 DOM)
RETURNS (
  O1 TYPE OF DOM,
  O2 DOM)
AS
  DECLARE VARIABLE V1 TYPE OF DOM;
  DECLARE VARIABLE V2 DOM;

BEGIN
  ...
END
      </programlisting>
      <note>
        <para>A new field RDB$VALID_BLR was added in RDB$RELATIONS and RDB$TRIGGERS to indicate
        whether the procedure/trigger is valid after an ALTER DOMAIN operation.  The value of RDB$VALID_BLR
        is shown in the ISQL commands SHOW PROCEDURE or SHOW TRIGGER.</para>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-psql-collt" xreflabel="COLLATE in Stored Procedures"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>COLLATE in Stored Procedures and Parameters</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> Collations can now be applied to PSQL variables, including 
      stored procedure parameters.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-psql-views-currof" xreflabel="WHERE CURRENT OF for Views"><!-- Level 3 section -->
      <title>WHERE CURRENT OF Now Allowed for Views</title>
      <para><ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1213">Feature
      request CORE-1213</ulink></para>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> The cursor operator <command>WHERE CURRENT OF</command> can 
      now step through a cursor set selected from a view set, just as it does in a cursor set output from a SELECT 
      on a table. For example:</para>
      <programlisting>
...
FOR SELECT ...
   FROM MY_VIEW INTO ... AS CURSOR VIEW_CURSOR DO
BEGIN
  ...
  DELETE FROM MY_VIEW
    WHERE CURRENT OF VIEW_CURSOR;
  ...
END
      </programlisting>
    </section>
    
<!-- /////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////// -->
<!-- V.2.0.X -->
<!-- /////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////// -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-context-rowcount" xreflabel="ROW_COUNT Counts Rows Returned by SELECT"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Context Variable ROW_COUNT Enhanced</title>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>ROW_COUNT has been enhanced so that it can now return the number of rows returned by 
      a SELECT statement.</para>

      <para>For example, it can be used to check whether a singleton SELECT INTO statement has 
      performed an assignment:</para>
       <programlisting>
  ..
  BEGIN
    SELECT COL FROM TAB INTO :VAR;

    IF (ROW_COUNT = 0) THEN
      EXCEPTION NO_DATA_FOUND;
  END
  ..
      </programlisting>
      <para>See also its usage in the examples below for explicit PSQL cursors.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-cursors" xreflabel="Explicit Cursors"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Explicit Cursors</title>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>It is now possible to declare and use multiple cursors in PSQL.  Explicit cursors are available in a
      DSQL EXECUTE BLOCK structure as well as in stored procedures and triggers.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax pattern</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
    DECLARE [VARIABLE] &lt;cursor_name&gt; CURSOR FOR ( &lt;select_statement&gt; );
    OPEN &lt;cursor_name&gt;;
    FETCH &lt;cursor_name&gt; INTO &lt;var_name&gt; [, &lt;var_name&gt; ...];
    CLOSE &lt;cursor_name&gt;;
      </programlisting>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>
      <para>1.</para>
      <programlisting>
    DECLARE RNAME CHAR(31);
    DECLARE C CURSOR FOR ( SELECT RDB$RELATION_NAME
                              FROM RDB$RELATIONS );
    BEGIN
      OPEN C;
      WHILE (1 = 1) DO
      BEGIN
        FETCH C INTO :RNAME;
        IF (ROW_COUNT = 0) THEN
          LEAVE;
        SUSPEND;
      END
      CLOSE C;
    END
      </programlisting>

      <para>2.</para>
      <programlisting>
    DECLARE RNAME CHAR(31);
    DECLARE FNAME CHAR(31);
    DECLARE C CURSOR FOR ( SELECT RDB$FIELD_NAME
                           FROM RDB$RELATION_FIELDS
                           WHERE RDB$RELATION_NAME = :RNAME
                           ORDER BY RDB$FIELD_POSITION );
    BEGIN
      FOR
        SELECT RDB$RELATION_NAME
        FROM RDB$RELATIONS
        INTO :RNAME
      DO
      BEGIN
        OPEN C;
        FETCH C INTO :FNAME;
        CLOSE C;
        SUSPEND;
      END
    END
      </programlisting>
      <note>
      <itemizedlist>
      <listitem><para>Cursor declaration is allowed only in the declaration section of a PSQL block/procedure/trigger,
      as with any regular local variable declaration.</para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>Cursor names are required to be unique in the given context. They must not conflict with the
      name of another cursor that is "announced", via the AS CURSOR clause, by a FOR SELECT cursor.  However, a
      cursor can share its name with any other type of variable within the same context, since the operations
      available to each are different.</para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>Positioned updates and deletes with cursors using the WHERE CURRENT OF clause
      are allowed.</para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>Attempts to fetch from or close a FOR SELECT cursor are prohibited.</para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>Attempts to open a cursor that is already open, or to fetch from or close a cursor
       that is already closed, will fail.</para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>All cursors which were not explicitly closed will be closed automatically on exit from
       the current PSQL block/procedure/trigger.</para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>The ROW_COUNT system variable can be used after each FETCH statement to check whether any row
      was returned.</para></listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-default-args" xreflabel="Stored Procedure Arguments Can Take Defaults"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Defaults for Stored Procedure Arguments</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Defaults can now be declared for stored procedure arguments.</para>
      <para>The syntax is the same as a default value definition for a column or domain, except that you can
      use '=' in place of 'DEFAULT' keyword.</para>

      <para>Arguments with default values must be last in the argument list;  that is, you cannot declare
      an argument that has no default value after any arguments that have been declared with default values.  The
      caller must supply the values for all of the arguments preceding any that are to use their defaults.</para>

      <para>For example, it is illegal to do something like this: &nbsp;&nbsp;<literal>supply arg1, arg2, miss arg3, 
      set arg4...</literal></para>

      <para>Substitution of default values occurs at run-time. If you define a procedure with defaults (say P1),
      call it from another procedure (say P2) and skip some final, defaulted arguments, then the default values
      for P1 will be substituted by the engine at time execution P1 starts.  This means that, if you change the
      default values for P1, it is not necessary to recompile P2.</para>

      <para>However, it is still necessary to disconnect all client connections, as discussed in the Borland
      InterBase 6 beta &quot;Data Definition Guide&quot; (DataDef.pdf), in the section &quot;Altering and
      dropping procedures in use&quot;.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
   CONNECT ... ;
   SET TERM ^;
   CREATE PROCEDURE P1 (X INTEGER = 123)
   RETURNS (Y INTEGER)
   AS
   BEGIN
     Y = X;
     SUSPEND;
   END ^
   COMMIT ^
   SET TERM ;^

   SELECT * FROM P1;

              Y
   ============

            123

   EXECUTE PROCEDURE P1;

              Y
   ============
            123

   SET TERM ^;
   CREATE PROCEDURE P2
   RETURNS (Y INTEGER)
   AS
   BEGIN
     FOR SELECT Y FROM P1 INTO :Y
     DO SUSPEND;
   END ^
   COMMIT ^
   SET TERM ;^

   SELECT * FROM P2;

              Y
   ============

            123

   SET TERM ^;
   ALTER PROCEDURE P1 (X INTEGER = CURRENT_TRANSACTION)
            RETURNS (Y INTEGER)
   AS
   BEGIN
     Y = X;
    SUSPEND;
   END; ^
   COMMIT ^
   SET TERM ;^

   SELECT * FROM P1;

              Y
   ============

           5875

   SELECT * FROM P2;

              Y
   ============

            123

   COMMIT;

   CONNECT  ... ;

   SELECT * FROM P2;

              Y
   ============

           5880

      </programlisting>

      <note>
      <para>The source and BLR for the argument defaults are stored in RDB$FIELDS.</para>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-leave-label" xreflabel="LEAVE &lt;label&gt; Flow Control Operator"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>LEAVE &lt;label&gt; Syntax Support</title>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>

      <para>New <function>LEAVE &lt;label&gt;</function> syntax now allows PSQL loops to be marked with labels
      and terminated in Java style.  The purpose is to stop execution of the current block and unwind back to
      the specified label.  After that execution resumes at the statement following the terminated loop.</para>
      
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax pattern</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
    &lt;label_name&gt;: &lt;loop_statement&gt;
    ...
    LEAVE [&lt;label_name&gt;]
      </programlisting>
      <para>where &lt;loop_statement&gt; is one of: WHILE, FOR SELECT, FOR EXECUTE STATEMENT.</para>
      
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>
      
      <para>1.</para>
      <programlisting>
   FOR
     SELECT COALESCE(RDB$SYSTEM_FLAG, 0), RDB$RELATION_NAME
       FROM RDB$RELATIONS
       ORDER BY 1
     INTO :RTYPE, :RNAME
     DO
     BEGIN
       IF (RTYPE = 0) THEN
         SUSPEND;
       ELSE
         LEAVE; -- exits current loop
     END
      </programlisting>
      
      <para>2.</para>
      <programlisting>
   CNT = 100;
   L1:
   WHILE (CNT &gt;= 0) DO
   BEGIN
     IF (CNT &lt; 50) THEN
       LEAVE L1; -- exists WHILE loop
     CNT = CNT - l;
   END
      </programlisting>
      
      <para>3.</para>
      <programlisting>
   STMT1 = 'SELECT RDB$RELATION_NAME FROM RDB$RELATIONS';
   L1:
   FOR
     EXECUTE STATEMENT :STMT1 INTO :RNAME
   DO
   BEGIN
     STMT2 = 'SELECT RDB$FIELD_NAME FROM RDB$RELATION_FIELDS
       WHERE RDB$RELATION_NAME = ';
     L2:
     FOR
       EXECUTE STATEMENT :STMT2 || :RNAME INTO :FNAME
     DO
     BEGIN
       IF (RNAME = 'RDB$DATABASE') THEN
         LEAVE L1; -- exits the outer loop
       ELSE IF (RNAME = 'RDB$RELATIONS') THEN
         LEAVE L2; -- exits the inner loop
       ELSE
         SUSPEND;
     END
   END
      </programlisting>
      
      <note>
      <para>Note that LEAVE without an explicit label means interrupting the current (innermost) loop.</para>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-old" xreflabel="OLD Variables Now Read-only"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>OLD Context Variables Now Read-only</title>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The set of OLD context variables available in trigger modules is now read-only. An attempt to assign a
      value to OLD.something will be rejected.</para>
      <note>
        <para>NEW context variables are now read-only in AFTER-triggers as well.</para>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-stacktrace" xreflabel="Stack Trace for PSQL Exceptions"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>PSQL Stack Trace</title>
        <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The API client can now extract a simple stack trace Error Status Vector when an exception 
      occurs during PSQL  execution (stored procedures or triggers).  A stack trace is represented by 
      one string (2048 bytes max.) and  consists of all the stored procedure and trigger names, starting
      from the point where the exception occurred,  out to the outermost caller. If the actual trace is
      longer than 2Kb, it is truncated.</para>

      <para>Additional items are appended to the status vector as follows:</para>
      <programlisting>
   isc_stack_trace, isc_arg_string, &lt;string length&gt;, &lt;string&gt;
      </programlisting>

      <para><function>isc_stack_trace</function> is a new error code with value of 335544842L.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>

      <para>Metadata creation</para>
      <programlisting>
  CREATE TABLE ERR (
    ID INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    NAME VARCHAR(16));

  CREATE EXCEPTION EX '!';
  SET TERM ^;

  CREATE OR ALTER PROCEDURE ERR_1 AS
  BEGIN
    EXCEPTION EX 'ID = 3';
  END ^

  CREATE OR ALTER TRIGGER ERR_BI FOR ERR
    BEFORE INSERT AS
  BEGIN
    IF (NEW.ID = 2)
    THEN EXCEPTION EX 'ID = 2';

    IF (NEW.ID = 3)
    THEN EXECUTE PROCEDURE ERR_1;

    IF (NEW.ID = 4)
    THEN NEW.ID = 1 / 0;
  END ^

  CREATE OR ALTER PROCEDURE ERR_2 AS
  BEGIN
    INSERT INTO ERR VALUES (3, '333');
  END ^
      </programlisting>

      <para>1. User exception from a trigger:</para>
      <programlisting>
  SQL&quot; INSERT INTO ERR VALUES (2, '2');
  Statement failed, SQLCODE = -836
  exception 3
  -ID = 2
  -At trigger 'ERR_BI'
      </programlisting>
      
      <para>2. User exception from a procedure called by a trigger:</para>
      <programlisting>
  SQL&quot; INSERT INTO ERR VALUES (3, '3');
  Statement failed, SQLCODE = -836
  exception 3
  -ID = 3
  -At procedure 'ERR_1'
  At trigger 'ERR_BI'
      </programlisting>
      
      <para>3. Run-time exception occurring in trigger (division by zero):</para>
      <programlisting>
  SQL&quot; INSERT INTO ERR VALUES (4, '4');
  Statement failed, SQLCODE = -802
  arithmetic exception, numeric overflow, or string truncation
  -At trigger 'ERR_BI'
      </programlisting>
      
      <para>4. User exception from procedure:</para>
      <programlisting>
  SQL&quot; EXECUTE PROCEDURE ERR_1;
  Statement failed, SQLCODE = -836
  exception 3
  -ID = 3
  -At procedure 'ERR_1'
      </programlisting>
      
      <para>5. User exception from a procedure with a deeper call stack:</para>
      <programlisting>
  SQL&quot; EXECUTE PROCEDURE ERR_2;
  Statement failed, SQLCODE = -836
  exception 3
  -ID = 3
  -At procedure 'ERR_1'
  At trigger 'ERR_BI'
  At procedure 'ERR_2'
      </programlisting>

    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-psql-udfcall" xreflabel="Call UDFs as Procedures"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Call a UDF as a Void Function (Procedure)</title>
        <author><firstname>N.</firstname><surname>Samofatov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>In PSQL, supported UDFs, e.g. RDB$SET_CONTEXT, can be called as though they were void functions
      (a.k.a <quote>procedures</quote> in Object Pascal).  For example:</para>
      <programlisting>
  BEGIN
     ...
     RDB$SET_CONTEXT('USER_TRANSACTION', 'MY_VAR', '123');
     ...
  END
      </programlisting>
    </section>

  </section><!-- sect1 -->

</chapter>