<chapter id="rnfb210-scrty">
  <title>Security</title>
  <para>In this chapter are details of the changes to Firebird security that came with
  the release of Firebird 2 and its successors.  Further changes and enhancements introduced in V.2.1
  are highlighted.</para>

  <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Summary of Changes</title>
    <para>Improving security has had a lot of focus in Firebird 2.0 development.  The following is a summary of the
    major changes.</para>

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary-sec-db"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>New security database</title>
      <para>The new security database is renamed as <function>security2.fdb</function>.  Inside, the user
      authentication table, where user names and passwords are stored, is now called <function>RDB$USERS</function>.
      There is no longer a table named <quote>users</quote> but a new <emphasis>view</emphasis> over RDB$USERS that
      is named <quote>USERS</quote>.  Through this view, users can change their passwords.</para>

      <para>For details of the new database, see <xref linkend="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-auth-fbtwo-secdb"/> in the section about
      authentication later in this chapter.</para>

      <para>For instructions on updating previous security databases, refer to the
      section <xref linkend="rnfb20x-sec-new-db"/> at the end of this chapter.</para>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb210-sec-summary-wintrusted"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Using Windows Security to Authenticate Users</title>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> From Firebird 2.1 onward, Windows
      <quote>Trusted User</quote> security can be applied for authenticating Firebird users
      on a Windows host.  The Trusted User's security context is passed to the Firebird server
      instead of the Firebird user name and password and, if it succeeds, it is used to determine
      the Firebird security user name.</para>

      <para>For details see the section below, <xref linkend="rnfb210-wintrusted"/><!-- Windows Trusted User 
      Security -->.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary-pwd"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Better password encryption</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Password encryption/decryption now uses a more secure password hash calculation algorithm.</para>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary-usermod"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Users can modify their own passwords</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The SYSDBA remains the keeper of the security database.  However, users can now modify their own
      passwords.</para>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary-gsec"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Non-server access to security database is rejected</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis>gsec</emphasis> now uses the Services API.  The server will refuse any access to security2.fdb
      except through the Services Manager.</para>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary-no-brute"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Active protection from brute-force attack</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Attempts to get access to the server using brute-force techniques on accounts and passwords are now
      detected and locked out.</para>
      <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Login with password is required from any remote client</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>Clients making too many wrong login attempts are blocked from further attempts for a period</para>
      </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>Support for brute-force attack protection has been included in both the attachment functions of the
      Firebird API and the Services API.  For more details, see <xref linkend="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-protect"/></para>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-summary-vulner" xreflabel="Warning"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Vulnerabilities have been closed</title>
        <author><firstname>A. Peshkov,</firstname><surname>C. Valderrama</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Several known vulnerabilities in the API have been closed. </para>
      <caution>
        <para>It must be noted that the restoration of the <emphasis role="bold">server redirection
        (&quot;multi-hop&quot;) capability</emphasis> to Firebird 2 potentially throws up a new vulnerability.
        For that reason, it is controlled by a parameter (<xref linkend="rnfb20x-fbconf-redirection"/>) in
        <filename>firebird.conf</filename>, which you should not enable unless you really understand its
        implications.</para>
        <para>These days, the ability to redirect requests to other servers is dangerous.  Suppose you have one
        carefully protected firebird server, access to which is possible from the Internet.  In a situation where
        this server has unrestricted access to your internal LAN, it will work as a gateway for incoming requests
        like <literal> firebird.your.domain.com:internal_server:/private/database.fdb </literal>.</para>
        <para>Knowing the name or IP address of some internal server on your LAN is enough for an intruder:  he does
        note even need login access to the external server.  Such a gateway easily overrides a firewall that is
        protecting your LAN from outside attack.</para>
      </caution>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->
  </section><!-- level 1 -->

  <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Details of the Security Changes in Firebird 2</title>
    <para>Security focus was directed at some recognised weaknesses in Firebird's security from malicious
    attacks:</para>
    <itemizedlist>
    <listitem><para>the lack of brute-force resistant passwords encryption in the security database</para></listitem>
    <listitem><para>the ability for any remote user with a valid account to open the security database and read
    hashes from it (especially interesting in combination with the first point)</para></listitem>
    <listitem><para>the inability for users to change their own passwords</para></listitem>
    <listitem><para>the lack of protection against remote brute-forcing of passwords on the server
    directly</para></listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-auth"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Authentication</title>
      <para>Firebird authentication checks a server-wide security database in order to decide whether a database or
      server connection request is authorised.  The security database stores the user names and passwords of all
      authorised login identities.</para>
        <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-auth-fbonefive"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Firebird 1.5 Authentication</title>
        <para>In Firebird 1.5 the DES algorithm is used twice to hash the password:  first by the client, then by
        the server, before comparing it with the hash stored in security database. However, this sequence becomes
        completely broken when the SYSDBA changes a password.  The client performs the hash calculation twice and
        stores the resulting hash directly in the security database. Therefore, hash management is completely
        client-dependent (or, actually, client-defined).</para>
      </section><!-- level 3 -->

      <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-auth-fbtwo"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Firebird 2: Server-side Hashing</title>
        <para>To be able to use stronger hashes, another approach was called for.  The hash to be stored on the
        server should always be calculated on the server side. Such a schema already exists in Firebird -- in the
        Services API. This led to the decision to use the Services API for any client activity related to user
        management. Now, <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> and the isc_user_add(modify, delete) API functions all use services to access the
        security database.  (Embedded access to Classic server on POSIX is the exception --see below). </para>
        <para>It became quite easy to make any changes to the way passwords are hashed - it is always performed by
        the server. It is no longer <emphasis>gsec</emphasis>'s problem to calculate the hash for the security database: it simply asks
        services to do the work!</para>
        <para>It is worth noting that the new <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> works successfully with older Firebird versions, as long as the
        server's architecture supports services.</para>

        <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-auth-fbtwo-hash"><!-- Level 4 section -->
          <title>The SHA-1 Hashing Algorithm</title>
          <para>This method leads to the situation where</para>
          <orderedlist>
          <listitem><para>a hash valid for user A is invalid for user B</para></listitem>
          <listitem><para>when a user changes his password -- even to exactly the same string as before -- the data
          stored in RDB$USERS.RDB$PASSWD is new.</para></listitem>
          </orderedlist>

          <para>Although this situation does not increase resistance to a brute-force attempt to crack the password,
          it does make &quot;visual&quot; analysis of a stolen password database much harder.</para>
        </section><!-- level 4 -->
      </section><!-- level 3 -->

      <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-auth-fbtwo-secdb" xreflabel="New Security Database"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>The New Security Database</title>

        <para>The structure of security database was changed. In general, now it contains a patch by Ivan Prenosil,
        with some minor differences, enabling any user to change his/her own password, .</para>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>In firebird 1.5 the table USERS has to be readable by PUBLIC, an engine requirement without
            which the password validation process would fail.  Ivan's patch solution used a view, with the condition
            &quot;WHERE USER = ''&quot;. That worked due to another bug in the engine that left the SQL variable USER
            empty, not 'authenticator', as it might seem from engine's code.</para>
            <para>Once that bug was fixed, it was certainly possible to add the condition &quot;USER = 'authenticator'&quot;.
            For the short term, that was OK, because the username is always converted to upper case.</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>A better solution was found, that avoids making user authentication depend on an SQL trick.
            The result is that the non-SYSDBA user can see only his own login in any user-management tool
            (<emphasis>gsec</emphasis>, or any graphical interface that use the Services API). SYSDBA continues 
            to have full access to manage users' accounts.</para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>

        <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-gsec-dbstruc"><!-- Level 4 section -->
          <title>New security database structure</title>
          <para>The Firebird 2 security database is named <literal>security2.fdb</literal>.  For user authentication
          it has a new table named <literal>RDB$USERS</literal> that stores the new hashed passwords.  A view over
          this table replaces the old USERS table and enables users to change their own passwords.</para>

          <para>The DDL for the new structures can be found in <xref linkend="rnfb210-appx-C"/><!-- Appendix C -->.</para>
        </section><!-- level 4 -->
      </section><!-- level 3 -->
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-gsec"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>gsec in Firebird 2</title>
      <para>Special measures were thus taken to make remote connection to the security database completely
      impossible.  Don't be surprised if some old program fails on attempting direct access:  this is by design.
      Users information may now be accessed only through the Services API and the equivalent internal access to
      services now implemented in the <function>isc_user_*</function> API functions.</para>

    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-dtl-protect" xreflabel="Protection from Brute-force Hacking"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Protection from Brute-force Hacking</title>
      <para>Current high-speed CPUs and fast WAN connections make it possible to try to brute-force Firebird
      server users' passwords.  This is especially dangerous for Superserver which, since Firebird 1.5,
      performs user authentication very fast. Classic is slower, since it has to create new process for each
      connection, attach to the security database within that connection and compile a request to the table
      RDB$USERS before validating login and password. Superserver caches the connection and request, thus enabling a
      much faster user validation.</para>
      <para>Given the 8-byte maximum length of the traditional Firebird password, the brute-force hacker had a
      reasonable chance to break into the Firebird installation.</para>

      <para>The v.2.0 Superserver has active protection to make a brute-force attack more difficult.  After a few
      failed attempts to log in, the user and IP address are locked for a few seconds, denying any attempt to
      log in with that particular user name OR from that particular IP address for a brief period.</para>
      <para>No setup or configuration is required for this feature.  It is active automatically as soon as the
      Firebird 2.0 SuperServer starts up.</para>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->
  </section><!-- level 1 -->

  <section id="rnfb210-wintrusted" xreflabel="Windows Trusted User Security"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Using Windows Security to Authenticate Users</title>
      <author>
        <firstname>Alex</firstname>
        <surname>Peshkov</surname>
      </author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> From Firebird 2.1 onward, Windows
    <quote>Trusted User</quote> security can be applied for authenticating Firebird users
    on a Windows host.  The Trusted User's security context is passed to the Firebird server
    and, if it succeeds, it is used to determine the Firebird security user name.</para>

    <para>Simply omitting the user and password parameters from the DPB/SPB will
    automatically cause Windows Trusted User authentication to be applied, in
    almost all cases.  See the Environment section, below, for exceptions.</para>

    <para><emphasis role="bold">Illustration</emphasis></para>

    <para>Suppose you have logged in to the Windows server SRV as user 'John'.  If
    you connect to server SRV with <emphasis>isql</emphasis>, without specifying a
    Firebird user name and password:</para>
    <programlisting>
isql srv:employee
    </programlisting>
    <para>and do:</para>
    <programlisting>
SQL&gt; select CURRENT_USER from rdb$database;
    </programlisting>
you will get something like:
    <programlisting>
USER
====================================================
SRV\John
    </programlisting>

    <section id="rnfb210-wintrusted-sqlprivs"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>SQL Privileges</title>
      <para>Windows users can be granted rights to access database objects and
      roles in the same way as regular Firebird users, emulating the capability
      that has been always been available users of Unix and Linux hosted
      Firebird databases.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-wintrusted-admin"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Administrators</title>
      <para>If a member of the built-in Domain Admins group connects to Firebird
      using trusted authentication, he/she will be connected as SYSDBA.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-wintrusted-fbconf"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Configuration Parameter <quote>Authentication</quote></title>
      <para>The new parameter <filename>Authentication</filename> has been added
      to firebird.conf for configuring the authentication method on Windows.
      Possible values are.-</para>
      <variablelist>
       <varlistentry>
          <term>Authentication = Native</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>Provides full compatibility with previous Firebird versions,
            avoiding trusted authentication.</para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

        <varlistentry>
          <term>Authentication = Trusted</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>The Security database is ignored and only Windows authentication
            is used.  In some respects, on Windows this is more secure than Native,
            in the sense that it is no less and no more secure than the
            security of the host operating system.</para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

        <varlistentry>
          <term>Authentication = Mixed</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>This is the default setting.</para>
            <para>To retain the legacy behaviour, when the
            <filename>ISC_USER</filename> and <filename>ISC_PASSWORD</filename>
            variables are set in the environment, they are picked and used instead
            of trusted authentication.</para>

            <note>
              <para>Trusted authentication can be coerced to override the
              environment variables if they are set&mdash;refer to the notes
              below.</para>
            </note>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
      </variablelist>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-wintrusted-forcing"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Forcing Trusted Authentication</title>
      <para>For the situation where trusted authentication is needed and there is
      a likelihood that <filename>ISC_USER</filename>
      and <filename>ISC_PASSWORD</filename> are set, there is a new DPB parameter
      that you can add to the DPB&mdash;<filename>isc_dpb_trusted_auth</filename>.</para>
      <para>Most of the Firebird command-line utilities support parameter by means of the switch
      <filename>-tru[sted]</filename> (the abbreviated form is available, according to the usual
      rules for abbreviating switches).</para>
      <note>
        <para>The <emphasis>qli</emphasis> and <emphasis>nbackup</emphasis> utilities do not
        follow the pattern:  they use single-letter switches that are somewhat arcane.  The
        switch of interest for <emphasis>qli</emphasis> is -K).  For
        <emphasis>nbackup</emphasis>, watch this space.  The facility to force trusted
        authentication is yet to be implemented for it.</para>
      </note>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
C:\Pr~\bin>isql srv:db            -- log in using trusted authentication
C:\Pr~\bin>set ISC_USER=user1
C:\Pr~\bin>set ISC_PASSWORD=12345
C:\Pr~\bin>isql srv:db            -- log in as 'user1' from environment
C:\Pr~\bin>isql -trust srv:db     -- log in using trusted authentication
      </programlisting>
    </section>

    <important>
      <para>Windows rules for full domain user names allow names longer than the maximum 31 characters
      allowed by Firebird for user names.  <emphasis role="bold">The 31-character limit is enforced</emphasis> and,
      from V.2.1, logins passing longer names are disabled.  This will remain the situation until the mapping
      of OS objects to database objects is implemented in a later Firebird version.</para>
    </important>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb20x-sec-posix"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Classic Server on POSIX</title>
    <para>For reasons both technical and historical, a Classic server on POSIX with embedded clients is especially
    vulnerable to security exposure.  Users having embedded access to databases MUST be given at least read access
    to the security database.</para>
    <para>This is the main reason that made implementing enhanced password hashes an absolute requirement. A
    malicious user with user-level access to Firebird could easily steal a copy of the security database, take it
    home and quietly brute-force the old DES hashes! Afterwards, he could change data in critical databases stored
    on that server.  Firebird 2 is much less vulnerable to this kind of compromise.</para>
    <para>But the embedded POSIX server had one more problem with security:  its implementation of the Services API
    calls the command-line <emphasis>gsec</emphasis>, as normal users do. Therefore, an embedded user-maintenance utility must have full
    access to security database.</para>
    <para>The main reason to restrict direct access to the security database was to protect it from access by old
    versions of client software. Fortuitously, it also minimizes the exposure of the embedded Classic on POSIX at
    the same time, since it is quite unlikely that the combination of an old client and the new server would be
    present on the production box.</para>
  </section>
  <section id="rnfb20x-sec-caution"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>For Any Platform</title>
    <caution>
      <para>The level of Firebird security is still not satisfactory in one serious respect, so
      please read this section carefully before opening port 3050 to the Internet.</para>
    </caution>
    <para>An important security problem with Firebird still remains unresolved:  the transmission of poorly
    encrypted passwords &quot;in clear&quot; across the network. It is not possible to resolve this problem without
    breaking old clients.</para>
    <para>To put it another way, a user who has set his/her password using a new secure method would be unable to use
    an older client to attach to the server. Taking this into account with plans to upgrade some aspects of the API
    in the next version, the decision was made not to change the password transmission method in Firebird 2.0.</para>
    <para>The immediate problem can be solved easily by using any IP-tunneling software (such as ZeBeDee) to move
    data to and from a Firebird server, for both 1.5 and 2.0.  It remains the recommended way to access your remote
    Firebird server across the Internet.</para>
  </section><!-- level 1 -->

  <section id="rnfb210-impr-secur"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Other Security Improvements</title>

    <section id="rnfb210-impr-secur1"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>isc_service_query() wrongly revealed the full database file spec</title>
      <para><ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1091">Feature request CORE-1091</ulink></para>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(V.2.1)</emphasis> When the server is configured &quot;DatabaseAccess = None&quot;,
      <filename>isc_service_query()</filename> would return the full database file path and name.  It has been
      corrected to return the database alias&mdash;one more argument in favour of making the use of database aliases
      standard practice!</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb210-impr-secur2"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Any user could view the server log through the Services API</title>
      <para><ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1148">Feature request CORE-1148</ulink></para>
      <para>This was a minor security vulnerability.  Regular users are now blocked from retrieving the
      server log using the Services API.  Requests are explicitly checked to ensure that the authenticated
      user is SYSDBA.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb20x-sec-new-db" xreflabel="Dealing with the New Security Database"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Dealing with the New Security Database</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>If you try to put a pre-Firebird 2 security database -- security.fdb or a renamed isc4.gdb -- into
    Firebird's new home directory and then try to connect to the server, you will get the message &quot;Cannot
    attach to password database&quot;.  It is not a bug: it is by design. A security database from an earlier
    Firebird version cannot be used directly in Firebird 2.0 or higher.</para>

    <para>The newly structured security database is named security2.fdb.</para>

    <para>In order to be able to use an old security database, it is necessary to run the upgrade
    script <function>security_database.sql</function>, that is in
    the <function>../upgrade</function> sub-directory of your Firebird server installation.</para>

    <note>
      <para>A copy of the script appears in <xref linkend="rnfb210-appx-C"/><!-- Appendix C -->.</para>
    </note>

    <section id="rnfb20x-sec-new-db-upgrade" xreflabel="Security DB Upgrade"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Doing the Security Database Upgrade</title>
      <para>To do the upgrade, follow these steps:</para>

      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Put your old security database in some place known to you, but not in Firebird's new home
          directory. Keep a copy available at all times!</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Start Firebird 2, using its new, native security2.fdb.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Convert your old security database to ODS11 (i.e. backup and restore it using Firebird 2.0).
          Without this step, running the security_database.sql script will fail!</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Connect the restored security database as SYSDBA and run the script.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Stop the Firebird service.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Copy the upgraded database to the Firebird 2 home directory as security2.fdb.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Restart Firebird.</para>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>

      <para>Now you should be able to connect to the Firebird 2 server using your old logins and passwords.</para>

      <section id="rnfb20x-sec-new-db-upgrade-nullability" xreflabel="Nullability of RDB$PASSWD"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Nullability of RDB$PASSWD</title>
        <para>In pre-2.0 versions of Firebird it was possible to have a user with NULL password. From v.2.0 onward,
        the RDB$PASSWD field in the security database is constrained as NOT NULL.</para>
        <para>However, to avoid exceptions during the upgrade process, the field is created as nullable
        by the upgrade script. If you are really sure you have no empty passwords in the security
        database, you may modify the script yourself.  For example, you may edit the line:</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  RDB$PASSWD RDB$PASSWD,
        </literallayout>
        <para>to be</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  RDB$PASSWD RDB$PASSWD NOT NULL,
        </literallayout>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb20x-sec-new-db-upgrade-legacyhash" xreflabel="Caution with LegacyHash"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Caution with LegacyHash</title>
        <para>As long as you configure <function>LegacyHash = 1</function> in <function>firebird.conf</function>,
        Firebird's security does not work completely.  To set this right, it is necessary to do as follows:</para>
        <orderedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>Change the SYSDBA password</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>Have the users change their passwords (in 2.0 each user can change his or her
            own password).</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>Set LegacyHash back to default value of 0, or comment it out. </para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>Stop and restart Firebird for the configuration change to take effect.</para>
          </listitem>
        </orderedlist>
      </section>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->
  </section><!-- level 1 -->
</chapter>