
  <chapter id="config-port">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Configuring the Port Service on Client and Server</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>By default a Firebird server listens on port 3050 for connection requests from clients.  Its registered
  port service name is <firstterm>gds_db</firstterm>.  The good news is that, if you can go with these defaults,
  you have to do nothing on either server or clients to configure the port service.</para>

  <para>You can use a different port, a different port service name, or both.  You might need to do this if port
  3050 is required for another service, for example, a concurrently running gds_db configured for a different
  version of Firebird or for an InterBase&reg; server.</para>

  <para>There are several ways to override the defaults.  Both the server and the clients must be configured to
  override the port service name or number, or both, in at least one of these ways:</para>
  <itemizedlist>
    <listitem>
      <para>in the client connection string</para>
      <para>&nbsp;</para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>in the command used to start the server executable</para>
      <para>&nbsp;</para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>by activating the RemoteServicePort or RemoteServiceName parameters in firebird.conf (V.1.5 onward)</para>
      <para>&nbsp;</para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>in the daemon configuration (for Classic on POSIX)</para>
      <para>&nbsp;</para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <para>by an entry in the Services file</para>
    </listitem>
  </itemizedlist>

  <para>Before examining each of these techniques, it will helpful to look at the logic used by the server to set
  the listening port and by the client to set the port that it should poll for requests.</para>

    <section id="config-port-server"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>How the server sets the listening port</title>

    <para>The server executable has an optional command-line switch (-p) by which it can signify either the
    port number it will be listening on or the name of the port service that will be listening.  At this point,
    if the switch is present, either port number 3050 or the port service name (gds_db) is replaced by the
    argument supplied with the -p switch.</para>

    <para>Next--or first, if there is no -p switch--a v.1.5 server checks firebird.conf to look at the parameters
    RemoteServiceName and RemoteServicePort:</para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>If both are commented with "#" then the defaults are assumed and no further change occurs.
        Any -p argument stands and the &quot;missing&quot; argument remains as the default.</para>
        <para>&nbsp;</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>If RemoteServiceName has been uncommented, but not RemoteServicePort, then the port service name is
        substituted only if it has not been overridden already by the -p switch.</para>
        <para>&nbsp;</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>If RemoteServicePort has been uncommented, but not RemoteServiceName, then the port number is
        substituted only if it has not been overridden already by the -p switch.</para>
        <para>&nbsp;</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>If both RemoteServicePort and RemoteServiceName are uncommented, then the RemoteServiceName takes
        precedence if it has not already been overridden by a -p argument.  If there is already a port service
        name override, the RemoteServiceName value is ignored and the RemoteServicePort value overrides 3050.</para>
        <para>&nbsp;</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>At this point, if an override of either the port number or the service name has been signaled,
        both v.1.0 and v.1.5 servers proceed to check the Services file for an entry with the correct combination
        of service name and port number.  If a match is found, all is well.  If not, and the port service name
        is not gds_db, the server will throw an exception and fail to start. If gds_db is the port service name
        and it cannot be resolved to any other port, it will map to port 3050 automatically.</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>If the default service name is to be overridden, then you will need to make an entry in the Services
    file--see the topic below, <xref linkend="config-port-services"/>.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="config-port-pswitch"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Using the -p switch override</title>

    <note>
      <para>Please note that this switch is available in Firebird 1.0.x, too, but was previously undocumented.</para>
    </note>

    <para>Starting the server with the optional -p switch enables you to override either the default port number
    (3050) or the default port service name (gds_db) that the server uses to listen for connection requests.
    The switch can override one, but not both.</para>

    <para>From Firebird 1.5 onward, you can use the -p switch in combination with a configuration in firebird.conf
    to enable an override to both the port number and the port service name.</para>

      <section id="config-port-pswitch-tcp"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Syntax for TCP/IP</title>
      <para>The command-line syntax for starting a server that applications are going to access through TCP/IP is as
      follows:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
 server-command &lt;other switches&gt; -p port-number | service-name
      </literallayout>

      <para>For example, to start the Superserver as an application and override the service name
      <emphasis>gds_db</emphasis> with <emphasis>fb_db</emphasis>:</para>

      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  fbserver -a -p fb_db
      </literallayout>

      <para>Or, to override port 3050 to 3051:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  fbserver -a -p 3051
      </literallayout>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->

      <section id="config-port-pswitch-wnet"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Syntax for WNet redirection</title>
      <para>On a WNet network (Named Pipes, NetBEUI), replace the -p switch argument syntax above with the
      following &quot;backslash-backslash-dot-at&quot; syntax:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  fbserver -a -p \\.@fb_db
      </literallayout>

      <para>Or:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  fbserver -a -p \\.@3051
      </literallayout>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->
    </section><!-- level 1 -->

    <section id="config-port-xinetd"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Classic on POSIX:  the inetd or xinetd daemon</title>

    <para>With Firebird Classic server on Linux or UNIX, the inetd or xinetd daemon is configured to listen on
    the default port and broadcast the default service name. The installation script will write the appropriate
    entry in the configuration file /etc/inetd.conf or /etc/xinetd.conf.</para>

    <para>You can edit the current configuration if necessary.  Following is an example of what you should see
    in xinetd.conf or inetd.conf after installing Firebird Classic on Linux:</para>
    <literallayout class="monospaced">
# default: on
# description: FirebirdSQL server
#
service gds_db
{
	flags			= REUSE KEEPALIVE
	socket_type		= stream
	wait			= no
	user			= root
#	user			= @FBRunUser@
	log_on_success		+= USERID
	log_on_failure 		+= USERID
	server			= /opt/firebird/bin/fb_inet_server
disable         = no
}
    </literallayout>

    <para>If you configured the port service to be different to the defaults, you will need to alter xinetd.conf
    or inetd.conf accordingly.  Restart xinetd (or inetd) with kill -HUP to make sure the daemon will use the
    new configuration.</para>

    <caution>
      <para>Connection requests will fail if both xinetd (or inetd) and fbserver  (or ibserver) attempt to listen
      on the same port. If your host machine has this double configuration, it will be necessary to set things up
      so that each server version has its own service port.</para>
    </caution>
    </section>

    <section id="config-port-conf"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Using a configuration file parameter</title>

    <para>You can configure either RemoteServiceName or RemoteServicePort in firebird.conf to override either the
    default port number (3050) or the default port service name (gds_db) that the server uses to listen for
    connection requests.</para>

    <para>The engine will use one RemoteService* parameter, but not both.  If you configure both, it will
    ignore RemoteServicePort in all cases, except where the server start command was invoked with the -p switch
    supplying an override to the port service name.  Thus, you can use the -p switch and a RemoteService*
    parameter, in combination, to override both port number and service name.</para>

    <para>If the default service name is to be overridden, then you need to make an entry in the Services file.</para>
    <tip>
      <para>GOTCHA!  If you uncomment RemoteServiceName or RemoteServicePort, but leave the default values intact,
      they will be treated as overrides.  It will then be necessary to make an explicit entry in the services file
      for the default port service settings.</para>
    </tip>
    </section>

    <section id="config-port-client"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Setting up a client to find the service port</title>
    <para>If you set up your server with the installation defaults (service gds_db listening on port 3050) then
    no configuration is required.  If the server is listening on a different port or is using a different port
    service name, the client application and/or its host machine need some enabling configuration to help the
    Firebird client library to find the listening port.</para>

    <para>The connection string used by a client can include information for polling the server's listening port
    in various ways.  Firebird 1.5 clients can optionally use a local copy of firebird.conf.  Changes may also
    be needed in the client's services file.</para>

      <section id="config-port-client-connstr"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Using the connection string</title>
      <para>If only the port number or the service name has been reconfigured, then include the alternative port
      number or service name in the connection string.  This works for all versions of Firebird.</para>

      <variablelist>
        <varlistentry><term><emphasis role="bold">Syntax for TCP/IP connections</emphasis></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>To connect to a database named server named alice that is broadcasting on port 3050 with the
          service name fb_db, the connection string would be:</para>

          <para><emphasis>For POSIX:</emphasis></para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
  alice/fb_db:/data/teaparty.fdb
          </literallayout>
          <para>Or, if the service name is gds_db and the port number is 3051:</para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
  alice/3051:/data/teaparty.fdb
          </literallayout>

          <para><emphasis>For Windows:</emphasis></para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
  alice/fb_db:D:\data\teaparty.fdb
          </literallayout>
          <para>Or, if the service name is gds_db and the port number is 3051:</para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
  alice/3051:D:\data\teaparty.fdb
          </literallayout>
          <note>
            <para>Notice that the separator between the server name and the port is a slash, not a colon. The
            colon before the physical path string is still required.</para>
          </note>
        </listitem></varlistentry>

        <varlistentry><term><emphasis role="bold">Syntax for WNet connections</emphasis></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>On a WNet network, use UNC-style notation:</para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
 \\alice@3051\d:\teaparty.fdb
          </literallayout>
          <para>or</para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
 \\alice@fb_db\d:\teaparty.fdb
          </literallayout>
          <para>If the server's configured port number or service name is an override, then you need to make an
          entry in the Services file.</para>
        </listitem></varlistentry>
      </variablelist>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->

      <section id="config-port-client-alias"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Using port syntax with database aliases</title>
      <para>To connect through a non-default port with a database alias, affix the port number or service name
      to the server name, not to the alias.  For example, suppose the database alias is stored in aliases.conf
      as</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  rabbit = /data/teaparty.fdb
      </literallayout>
      <para>Your application's connection string for server 'alice' would be:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  alice/fb_db:rabbit
      </literallayout>
      <para>or</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  alice/3051:rabbit
      </literallayout>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->

      <section id="config-port-client-confcopy"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Using a copy of firebird.conf</title>
      <para>From Firebird 1.5 onward, you can optionally include a client-side copy of firebird.conf in the
      firebird root directory and configure RemoteServiceName or RemoteServicePort to help the client to locate
      the server port.</para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>You can configure one of these two parameters to extend the override provided for the other one
          through the connection string (above);  or to override only the RemoteServiceName or the
          RemoteServicePort without using the connection string to do it.</para>
          <para>&nbsp;</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you need to avoid passing the port service name or the port number in the connection string
          and the server is using non-defaults for both, you can configure both RemoteServiceName and
          RemoteServicePort. You would use this technique if your client application  needed to retain the
          capability to connect to InterBase or Firebird 1.0 servers.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->

      <section id="config-port-client-location"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Location of Firebird artifacts on clients</title>
      <para>When you rely on firebird.conf on client machines, it is important that the client library knows where
      to find it.  You will need to set up a Firebird root directory and inform the system of its location.
      Use the FIREBIRD environment variable to do this. Windows clients can alternatively use the Firebird
      Registry key. With a correct client setup, you can also make use of a local version of the message
      file.</para>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->
    </section><!-- level 1 -->

    <section id="config-port-services" xreflabel="Configuring the Services File"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Configuring the Services File</title>
    <para>You do not need to configure a service port entry for your Firebird server or clients if the server
    uses the installation defaults, gds_db on port 3050.  If gds_db is the port service name and it cannot be
    resolved to any other port, it will map to port 3050 automatically.</para>

    <para>If you are configuring the service port for a different port or service name, both the server and the
    client must be explicitly updated to reflect the reconfiguration. On both Linux and Windows, this information
    is stored in the services file.</para>

      <section id="config-port-services-locate-file"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Locating the services file</title>
      <variablelist>
        <varlistentry><term>Windows XP/S2003</term>
        <listitem>
          <para><function>C:\windows\system32\drivers\etc\services</function></para>
        </listitem></varlistentry>
        <varlistentry><term>Windows NT/2000</term>
        <listitem>
          <para><function>C:\winnt\system32\drivers\etc\services</function></para>
        </listitem></varlistentry>
        <varlistentry><term>Windows 95/98/ME</term>
        <listitem>
          <para><function>C:\windows\services</function></para>
        </listitem></varlistentry>
        <varlistentry><term>Linux/UNIX</term>
        <listitem>
          <para><function>/etc/services</function></para>
        </listitem></varlistentry>
      </variablelist>

      <para>A services entry looks like this:</para>             
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  gds_db 3050/tcp # Firebird Server 1.5
      </literallayout>

      <para>Open the file using a text editor and either add a line or edit the existing gds_db entry,
      as follows:</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>for a Firebird 1.0.x server or client, alter either the service name or the port number to reflect
          how your server will start up.</para>
          <para>&nbsp;</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>for a Firebird 1.5 or higher server, edit or add a line, as required.  If you have a Firebird 1.0
          or InterBase server installed on the same host, retain the entries they require and add a new entry
          reflecting how the Firebird 1.5 server will start up.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      </section><!-- level 2 -->
    </section><!-- level 1 -->
  </chapter>
