
<chapter id="info">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Further Information</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <section id="info-devel"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>Firebird Development</title>
  <para>More information can be found about the Firebird database engine from
  <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org">the Firebird Project website</ulink>.</para>

  <para>If you are interested in being involved in Firebird development, or would like to raise a possible bug for
  discussion, please feel welcome to join our Firebird-Devel list.  To subscribe, simply send an empty email
  message to: <email>firebird-devel-request@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe</email>.</para>

  <important>
    <para>Please do not use the firebird-devel list for posting support questions, <emphasis>except</emphasis> if
    your question happens to be about <emphasis>building Firebird from sources</emphasis>.</para>
  </important>

  <para>The core developers (amongst others!) also hang out in the Firebird-Architect list.  This is also a non-
  support list, where architectural features and changes are discussed, often with great vehemence.  See the next
  section for list subscription information.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="info-lists"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>Lists and Newsgroups</title>
  <para>For technical support, please join the firebird-support list by going to the
  <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=lists">Lists and Newsgroups</ulink> index page
  at the Firebird website and clicking on the link to join the <emphasis role="bold">Firebird-support
  list</emphasis>.  The Firebird-support list handles technical problems with Firebird and also InterBase&reg;.</para>

  <para>At the Lists and Newsgroups index page you will find links to all of the more specialised lists as well:
  Firebird-Java for Jaybird support, Firebird-NET-Provider, Firebird-ODBC-devel, Firebird-PHP, Firebird-Python, etc.,
  as well as lists for the various Delphi interface components.</para>

  <para>The open source community operates several other discussion lists on various aspects of Firebird development.
  For details, please refer to the Lists and Newsgroups index page.</para>

    <section id="info-lists-news"><!-- Level 3 section -->
    <title>Newsgroup Mirrors</title>
    <para>The Firebird developers' list and the general community lists, along with some other lists of interest to
    Firebird and InterBase developers, are mirrored as newsgroups at <ulink url="news://news.atkin.com">the news.
    atkin.com news server</ulink>.  For historical reasons, some of them have weird names, e.g. &quot;egroups.ib-
    support&quot; is the mirror for the firebird-support list.</para>

    <tip>
      <para>If you want to post messages from a news mirror to the list, you must be subscribed to <emphasis>that
      list</emphasis>.</para>
    </tip>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section id="info-support"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>Paid Support</title>
  <para>Paid support worldwide for Firebird can be arranged through IBPhoenix.  Contact addresses and numbers are
  at the <ulink url="http://www.ibphoenix.com">IBPhoenix site</ulink>.</para>
  <para>Database recovery services for Firebird or InterBase databases can be handled by IBPhoenix.  For analyzing
  and possibly repairing corrupted databases yourself,
  try <ulink url="http://www.ibsurgeon.com">IBSurgeon.com</ulink>.  The IBSurgeon team also provides recovery
  services.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="info-sponsorship"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>Sponsorship</title>
  <para>Requests/offers for sponsored enhancements to Firebird can be taken directly to the
  <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=ffoundation">Firebird Foundation Inc.</ulink>,
  a non-profit organisation of Firebird community members that manages sponsorship and donor funding for the Firebird
  Project.  Send an email to <email>foundation@firebirdsql.org</email>.</para>

  <para>You may prefer to contact the Firebird project admins initially - send an email
  to <email>firebirds@users.sourceforge.net</email>.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="tools"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>Tools and Drivers</title>
  <para>Following is a selection of third-party products, both open source and commercial, that are available and
  used widely by Firebird developers.</para>

    <section id="tools-dba"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <title>Database Admin Tools</title>
    <para>Several excellent choices of GUI admin desktops for Firebird are listed in the
    Contributed Downloads page at the <ulink url="http://www.ibphoenix.com">IBPhoenix site</ulink>.  Some are
    open source, some are freeware, others are established commercial products.</para>

    <note>
      <para>Borland's IBConsole program is not recommended as a database administration client for
      Firebird 1.5.</para>
    </note>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->

    <section id="tools-drivers"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <title>Drivers and Components</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry><term>JAVA</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>The Jaybird JDBC driver project develops actively as part of the Firebird project.  It has a
        released Type 4 JDBC/JCA driver and a Type 2 driver in beta.  Sources and binaries can be downloaded from
        the <ulink url="http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=9028">Firebird release pages at
        Sourceforge</ulink>.</para>
        <para>For advice and to participate in development and testing, join up with
        the <ulink url="http://www.yahoogroups.com/community/firebird-java">Firebird-java forum</ulink> on
        Yahoogroups.</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>.NET and Mono</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>Firebird has an ongoing .NET driver project. Sources and binaries can be downloaded from
        the <ulink url="http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=9028">Firebird release pages at
        Sourceforge</ulink>.</para>
        <para>For advice and to participate in development and testing, join up with the
        <ulink url="http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/firebird-net-provider">Firebird .NET provider
        forum</ulink> at Sourceforge.</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>Delphi and C++Builder</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>Users have two powerful alternatives for full, direct connectivity with the Firebird 1.5 API, both
        well supported with developer and peer support:</para>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>Jason Wharton's IB Objects at http://www.ibobjects.com</para>
            <para>&nbsp;</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>FIBPLus at http://www.devrace.com</para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>C++</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>the freeware C++ access library 'IBPP' (http://www.ibpp.org), MPL license, hosted on sourceforge.net,
        fully portable between Win32 and Linux and probably other POSIX platforms. It is useful when you want
        low-level C-API kind of access, but with a light C++ abstraction level not bound to any particular
        development environment.</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ODBC</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>A list of ODBC drivers can be found listed in the Contributed Downloads
        page at <ulink url="http://www.ibphoenix.com">the IBPhoenix site</ulink>.  Lab for ongoing development of
        the open source Firebird/IBPhoenix ODBC/JDBC driver is in this forum:
        http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/firebird-odbc-devel</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>PHP</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>A group is continually working on bringing the old InterBase PHP extension up to standard for
        Firebird.  To ask about this project, join up with the Firebird-PHP forum
        at http://www.yahoogroups.com/community/firebird-php</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>PYTHON</term>
      <listitem>
        <para></para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term></term>
      <listitem>
        <para>KInterbasDB is a Python extension package that implements Python Database API 2.0-compliant support
        for Firebird.  Full native API support for the Firebird client;  in stable release and under active
        development.  BSD open source licence.  Downloads and news at http://kinterbasdb.sourceforge.net/</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
    </section><!-- level 2 -->
  </section><!-- level 1 -->

  <section id="doc"><!-- Level 1 section -->        
  <title>Documentation</title>
  <para>The documentation for InterBase v 6.0 applies also to the current FireBird release.  A beta version of
  InterBase(tm) 6 manuals is available in Adobe Acrobat format from various sources on the web.  They used to be
  available from the Borland archives but the links have been removed.  The easiest way to find a download site is
  to Google search for &quot;opguide.pdf&quot;.  That is the name of just one of the six manuals but, where you find
  one, you will generally find them all.</para>

  <important>
    <para>RELEASE NOTES (such as this document) provide the <emphasis>incremental documentation</emphasis> for the
    Firebird releases and sub-releases.  It is important to keep them on hand as the supplement to the old
    InterBase&reg; beta manuals.</para>
  </important>

  <para>A structured <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=doc">Documentation Index</ulink> is
  maintained on the Firebird community site.  This is work-in-progress and all additions are welcome - send a
  message to <email>firebird-docs@lists.sourceforge.net</email></para>

  <para>Several installation guidelines and other HowTos may be found in the documentation area which can be linked
  to from the Resources menu at the top of the main Firebird website pages.  Keep watching these links as
  documentation is continually under development.</para>

  <para>The authoritative bookshop title for Firebird, in English, is &quot;The Firebird Book: A Reference for 
  Database Developers&quot; by Helen Borrie (publ. Apress, August 2004, ISBN 1590592794).  It is easily obtainable 
  from   bookstores, from IBPhoenix and from a large number of web-based book outlets including Amazon.</para>

  <para>The main repository for documentation and white paperss on user and technical issues is
  the <ulink url="http://www.ibphoenix.com">IBPhoenix site</ulink>.  IB Phoenix also publishes a comprehensive
  subscription CD on a regular basis (single issues also available) which contains manuals published by
  them - Using Firebird and The Firebird Reference Guide.</para>

  <para>Some additional documentation may be discovered by visiting
  the <ulink url="http://www.borland.com/techpubs/interbase/">Borland techpubs area</ulink>.</para>
  </section><!-- level 1 -->
</chapter>
