
  <chapter id="intro">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Firebird 1.5.6 Release Notes</title>
  </chapterinfo>

  <section id="editions-this">
  <title>This Edition</title>
    <para>V.1.5.6 is the <emphasis>last</emphasis> sub-release in the 1.5.x series.  It should now be considered
    to be at &quot;end-of-life&quot;.</para>

    <section id="intro-editions-this-dpb">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>User Restrictions in the DPB</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>In previous sub-releases and versions several DPB parameters were accessible to ordinary users,
      causing some dangerous loopholes.  In some cases, they are settings that would alter the database header
      settings and potentially cause corruptions if not performed under administrator control;  in others,
      they initiate operations that are otherwise restricted to the SYSDBA.</para>
      <para>In this edition, these parameters have been made inaccessible to ordinary users. They are.-</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_shutdown and isc_dpb_online</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_gbak_attach, isc_dpb_gfix_attach and isc_dpb_gstat_attach</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_verify</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_no_db_triggers</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_set_db_sql_dialect</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_sweep_interval</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_force_write</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_no_reserve</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_set_db_readonly</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>isc_dpb_set_page_buffers (on Superserver)</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>The parameter <filename>isc_dpb_set_page_buffers</filename> can still be used by ordinary users on
      Classic and it will set the buffer size temporarily for that user and that session only.  When used by
      the SYSDBA on either Superserver or Classic, it will change the buffer count in the database header, i.e.,
      make a permanent change to the default buffer size.</para>
      <important>
        <title>Important Note for Developers and Users of Data Access Drivers and Tools</title>
        <para>This change will affect any of the listed DPB parameters that have been explicitly set, either
        by including them in the DPB implementation by default property values or by enabling them in tools
        and applications that access databases as ordinary users.  For example, a Delphi application that
        included 'RESERVE PAGE SPACE=TRUE' and 'FORCED WRITES=TRUE' in its database Params property, which
        caused no problems when the application connected to Firebird 1.5.5 or lower, now rejects a connection
        by a non-SYSDBA user with ISC ERROR CODE 335544788, <quote>Unable to perform operation. You must be
        either SYSDBA or owner of the database.</quote></para>
      </important>
    </section>
    
    <section id="intro-editions-this-vista">
      <title>For Users of Windows Vista, Server2008 and 7</title>
      <important>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>Connection to the Superserver service using the IPServer (&quot;Windows local&quot;)
            protocol is not supported.  It might be possible for certain users to use this protocol
            if <emphasis>fbserver.exe</emphasis> is running in the user's application space.</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para> On these platforms, the Explorer crashes when the Firebird 1.5 control panel
            applet is installed. This crash does NOT occur with Firebird 2.n, but attempts to backport
            the changes to Firebird 1.5 did not work.</para>
            <para>Since V.1.5.5, the installer disables installation of the 1.5 applet if Windows &gt;
            XP/Server2003 is detected as the host operating system. The service can still be controlled,
            like any other, through the Services administration applet.</para>

            <para><emphasis role="bold">If you intend to install v.1.5.6 manually from the zip kit, do
            not copy the Firebird control panel applet to the Windows/System32 folder.</emphasis></para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </important>
    </section>

    <section id="intro-editions-this-bugs">
      <title>Other Fixes</title>
      <para>A few bugs that arose since v.1.5.5 have also been fixed.  For details, 
      see <xref linkend="rlsnotes156-bugfixes155"/>.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section id="editions-prev">
  <title>Previous Editions</title>
  <variablelist>
  
    <varlistentry>
    <term>Firebird 1.5.5 Release Notes</term>
    <listitem>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>This sub-release addressed some security vulnerabilities reported
    by <ulink url="http://www.risesecurity.org/advisory/RISE-2007003">RISE Security</ulink> which
    were closed in Firebird 2.0.3.  Those fixes were back-ported to Firebird 1.5.5.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>A few bugs that arose since v.1.5.4 were fixed.  For details, see <xref 
          linkend="rlsnotes155-bugfixes154"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </listitem>
  </varlistentry>
  <varlistentry>
    <term>Firebird 1.5.4 Release Notes</term>
    <listitem>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>The Firebird 1.5.4 sub-release adds no new functionality but building the software for both Classic
          and SuperServer for HP-UX11 is now supported.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>This sub-release introduces a number of additional retrospective fixes to bugs
          that became apparent and were fixed in the Firebird 2 tree during the Firebird 2.0 beta cycle.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Fixes to bugs introduced in v.1.5, v.1.5.1, v.1.5.2 and v.1.5.3 are appended to the
          feature list in the section <xref linkend="rlsnotes154-bugfixes153"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>A further list of fixes is prepended to the <xref linkend="bugfixes-bugfix"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </listitem>
  </varlistentry>

  <varlistentry>
    <term>Firebird 1.5.3 Release Notes</term>
    <listitem>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>The Firebird 1.5.3 sub-release introduces a number of retrospective fixes to bugs that became apparent
          and were fixed in the Firebird 2 tree during the pre-alpha and alpha phases of the Firebird 2 development.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Minor enhancements added since v.1.5.2 are described in <xref linkend="rlsnotes153-intro-adds"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Note the addition of a new optional compatibility parameter to <function>firebird.conf</function>.
          For details of this parameter--<emphasis>OldColumnNaming</emphasis>--refer to the section
          <xref linkend="config-fb-conf-params-compat"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Fixes to bugs introduced in v.1.5, v.1.5.1 and v.1.5.2 are appended to the feature list in the section
          <xref linkend="rlsnotes153-bugfixes152"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>A further list of fixes is prepended to the <xref linkend="bugfixes-bugfix"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </listitem>
  </varlistentry>
  <varlistentry>
    <term>Firebird 1.5.2 Release Notes</term>
    <listitem>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Minor enhancements added since v.1.5.1 are described in <xref linkend="rlsnotes152-intro"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Fixes to bugs introduced in v.1.5 and v.1.5.1 are appended to the feature list in the section
          <xref linkend="rlsnotes152-bugfixes151"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>A further list of fixes is prepended to the <xref linkend="bugfixes-bugfix"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </listitem>
  </varlistentry>
  <varlistentry>
    <term>Firebird 1.5.1 Release Notes</term>
    <listitem>
      <para>Point release, Firebird 1.5.1, 14 July 2004 - Document version 151.00</para>
    </listitem>
    <listitem>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Minor enhancements added since v.1.5 were described in <xref linkend="rlsnotes151-intro"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Fixes to bugs introduced in v.1.5 are appended to the feature list in the section
        <xref linkend="rlsnotes151-bugfixes15"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>A further list of fixes is prepended to the <xref linkend="bugfixes-bugfix"/>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>A list of (currently one only) <xref linkend="rlsnotes151-known-issues"/> is included.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Some errata were corrected.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </listitem>
  </varlistentry>
  <varlistentry>
    <term>Firebird 1.5 Release Notes</term>
    <listitem>
      <para>Initial release, Firebird 1.5, 5 February 2004 - Document version 150.08</para>
    </listitem>
  </varlistentry>

  </variablelist>
  </section>

  <section id="intro-gen-notes"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>General Notes</title>
  <para>The Firebird" database engine has been developed by an independent team of voluntary developers from the
    InterBase&reg; source code that was released by Borland under the InterBase Public License v.1.0 on 25 July
    2000.</para>

  <para>Development on the Firebird 2 codebase began early in Firebird 1 development, with the porting of the
    Firebird 1 C code to C++ and the first major code-cleaning.  Firebird 1.5 was the first release of the Firebird
    2 codebase.  During subsequent development of Firebird 2.0 (released in November, 2006) many important bug 
    fixes were back-ported to the v.1.5 codebase.</para>

  <para>Firebird 1.0.x (last sub-release v.1.0.3, June 2003) is no longer in active maintenance.</para>

    <section id="intro-gen-notes-bin"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <title>The Firebird 1.5 Binaries</title>
    <para>The Firebird binaries can be downloaded through the Firebird website <ulink
    url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=files&amp;sub=engine">Downloads area</ulink>.  If you are
    looking for unusual builds that are not linked there, you might wish to plough through Firebird's <ulink
    url="http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=9028">Sourceforge project download area</ulink>.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="intro-gen-notes-vers"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <title>Version Strings for Firebird 1.5  Releases</title>
    <para>Win32: <quote>WI-V1.5.0.nnnn Firebird 1.5</quote></para>
    <para>Linux: <quote>LI-V1.5.0.nnnn Firebird 1.5</quote></para>
    <para>and so on, where <quote>nnnn</quote> is the build number.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="intro-gen-notes-doc"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <title>Documentation</title>
    <para>These release notes are currently your only source of free up-to-date documentation of changes that happened
    since Firebird 1.0.x.  Please refer to the Documentation section for locations of recommended 
    documentation.</para>
    <para>A Quick Start Guide for v.1.5 should be included in the /doc/ sub-directory of your Firebird installation.  
    This PDF document is also available <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/pdfmanual/Firebird-1.5-QuickStart.pdf">for
    download</ulink> or can be viewed online as 
    a <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/manual/qsg15.html">web document</ulink>.</para>
    </section>
  </section>
  </chapter>