
  <chapter id="misc">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Miscellaneous Enhancements</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>This chapter contains a number of enhancements to utilities, character sets and external functions
  (UDFs).</para>

    <section id="misc-charsets"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Character Sets</title>
    <para>New character sets, collations and changes in this release are listed below.
    V. 1.0 additions are included for the reader's convenience.</para>

    <section id="misc-charsets-v15-var"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>V. 1.5</title>
      <author><firstname>Various</firstname><surname>Contributors</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry><term>WIN1251_UA collation</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>Added WIN1251_UA collation (for both Russian and Ukrainian languages) for WIN1251 character set.</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>WIN1251 Uppercasing</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>Corrected default uppercasing for WIN1251</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>Hungarian Collation</term>
      <listitem>
        <para>Added ISO_HUN (for Hungarian language) for ISO8859_2 character set</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
    </section>

    <section id="misc-charsets-v15-blas"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>V. 1.5 (Binary Collations only)</title>
      <author><firstname>Blas </firstname><surname>Rodrigues Somoza</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS737 PC</term>
      <listitem><para>Greek</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS775 PC</term>
      <listitem><para>Baltic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS858</term>
      <listitem><para>Variant of Cp850 with Euro character (&euro;)</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS862</term>
      <listitem><para>PC Hebrew</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS864</term>
      <listitem><para>PC Arabic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS866</term>
      <listitem><para>MS-DOS Russian</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>DOS869</term>
      <listitem><para>IBM Modern Greek</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>WIN1255</term>
      <listitem><para>Windows Hebrew</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>WIN1256</term>
      <listitem><para>Windows Arabic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>WIN1257</term>
      <listitem><para>Windows Baltic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_3</term>
      <listitem><para>Latin 3 (Esperanto, Maltese, Pinyi, Sami, Croatian and others)</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_4</term>
      <listitem><para>Latin 4 (Baltic, Greenlandic, Lappish)</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_5</term>
      <listitem><para>Cyrillic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_6</term>
      <listitem><para>Arabic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_7</term>
      <listitem><para>Greek</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_8</term>
      <listitem><para>Hebrew</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_9</term>
      <listitem><para>Turkish</para></listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859_13</term>
      <listitem><para>Baltic</para></listitem></varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
    </section>

    <section id="misc-charsets-v10"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>V. 1.0.x</title>
      <author><firstname>Various</firstname><surname>Contributors</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry><term>Hungarian</term>
      <listitem><para>Added case insensitive Hungarian collation set <emphasis>(Sandor Szollosi)</emphasis></para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
      <varlistentry><term>ISO8859-2</term>
      <listitem><para>Firebird now supports character set ISO8859-2 (for Czech language).</para>
      </listitem></varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
    </section>
  </section>
<!--  -->
  <section id="misc-isql"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>New ISQL Features</title>
  <para>New in ISQL:</para>
    <section id="misc-isql-readline"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>&quot;readline&quot; Capability in the ISQL Shell</title>
      <author><firstname>Mark</firstname><surname>O'Donohue</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Command history support (like Unix readline) has been added to the isql shell.  Now you can use the
    Up and Down arrow keys to step back or forward through the commands submitted in the isql session.</para>
    </section>
  </section>
<!--  -->
  <section id="misc-udf"><!-- Level 1 section -->
  <title>External Functions (UDFs)</title>
  <para>User-defined functions.-</para>

    <section id="misc-udf-ib-udf"><!-- Level 2 section -->
    <title>In the ib_udf Library</title>
      <section id="misc-udf-ib-udf-rpad"><!-- Level 3 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>rpad()</title>
        <author><firstname>Juan</firstname><surname>Guerrero</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><function>rpad (instring, length, padcharacter)</function></para>
      <para>Right-pads the supplied string <function>instring</function> by appending padcharacters until the
      result string has the given <function>length</function>.</para>

      <para>The input string can be any length less than 32766 bytes.  Length must not exceed 32765 bytes.</para>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Declaration</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
  DECLARE EXTERNAL FUNCTION rpad
      CSTRING(80), INTEGER, CSTRING(1)
      RETURNS CSTRING(80) FREE_IT
      ENTRY_POINT 'IB_UDF_rpad' MODULE_NAME 'ib_udf';
      </programlisting>
      </section>

      <section id="misc-udf-ib-udf-lpad"><!-- Level 3 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>lpad()</title>
        <author><firstname>Juan</firstname><surname>Guerrero</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><function>lpad (instring, length, padcharacter)</function></para>
      <para>Left-pads the supplied string instring by prepending padcharacters until the result string has the
      given <function>length</function>.</para>

      <para>The input string can be any length less than 32766 bytes.  Length must not exceed 32765 bytes.</para>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Declaration</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
  DECLARE EXTERNAL FUNCTION lpad
      CSTRING(80), INTEGER, CSTRING(1)
      RETURNS CSTRING(80) FREE_IT
      ENTRY_POINT 'IB_UDF_lpad' MODULE_NAME 'ib_udf';
      </programlisting>
      </section>

      <section id="misc-udf-ib-udf-log"><!-- Level 3 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>log()</title>
        <author><firstname>Paul</firstname><surname>Vinkenoog</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><function>log (x, y)</function></para>
      <para>This function had an old bug, whereby the arguments x and y were erroneously reversed.  It should
      return the logarithm base x of y but in fact it returned the log base y of x.  It has been corrected.</para>

      <warning>
        <para>If it was used in your applications previously, PLEASE CHECK YOUR APPLICATION CODE!  it either
        returned the wrong results;  or someone, at some point, did a workaround and reversed the arguments
        deliberately in order to get the right calculation.</para> 
      </warning>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="misc-udf-fbudf"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>In the fbudf library</title>
    <para>Changes in Firebird 1.5 affect functions in the <firstterm>fbudf</firstterm> external function library, as
    follows.-</para>

    <orderedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>The *NVL and *NULLIF functions remain for backward compatibility, but are deprecated by the
        introduction of the new internal functions CASE, COALESCE and NULLIF.</para>
        <para>&nbsp;</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>If you are porting a database that was created in Firebird 1.0.x and you declared the fbudf functions
        truncate and round, those declarations will no longer work with Firebird 1.5 because the entry_point names
        were changed.  You will need to drop the functions and redeclare them, using the declarations from the
        fbudf.sql script in the 1.5 /UDF directory.</para>
      </listitem>
    </orderedlist>
    <caution>
      <para>Note that fbudf cannot handle string fields bigger than (32Kb - 1) bytes in length. This limit may
      have ill effects where strings are concatenated before being passed to UDFs taking string arguments.
      If the sum of field is beyond the limit, the behavior is undefined. The function may return a nonsense
      result or the fbudf code may perform an illegal operation.</para>
    </caution>
    </section>
  </section>
</chapter>