  <chapter id="rnfb30-general">
    <chapterinfo>
      <title>General Notes</title>
    </chapterinfo>

    <para>Thank you for choosing Firebird 3.0.  We cordially invite you to test it hard against 
    your expectations and engage with us in identifying and fixing any bugs you might encounter.</para>
    
    <para>If you are upgrading from a previous major release version, be sure to study Chapter 12,
    <link linkend="rnfb30-compat"><citetitle>Compatibility Issues</citetitle></link> before you 
    attempt to do anything to your existing databases!</para>
    
    <section id="rnfb30-general-improvements-v301">
      <title>Improvements in Sub-release V.3.0.1</title>
      <para>The following improvements appear in this sub-release:</para>
        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5266">CORE-5266</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: The statement 
        CREATE OR ALTER USER SYSDBA PASSWORD &lt;password&gt; can now be used to initialize an empty
        <function>securityN.fdb</function> security database. </para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. Peshkov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5257">CORE-5257</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: Nesting of keys in a plug-in
        configuration was enabled.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. Peshkov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5229">CORE-5229</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: For <link 
        linkend="rnfb30-apiods-api-winlocal">URL-like connection
        strings on Windows</link>, restriction of lookup to IPv4 only was enabled.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by Michal Kubecek</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5216">CORE-5216</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: Line and column numbers (location
        context) are now provided for runtime errors raised inside EXECUTE BLOCK.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by D. Yemanov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5205">CORE-5205</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: A switch was added to build 
        POSIX binaries with a built-in <filename>libtommath</filename> library.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. Peshkov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5201">CORE-5201</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> now returns
        a non-zero result code when restore fails on creating and activating a deferred user index.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. Peshkov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5167">CORE-5167</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>IMPROVEMENT: Implicit conversion between 
        Boolean and string is now done automatically when a string for 'true' or 'false' is used as a
        value in an expression. Case-insensitive. Not valid when used with a Boolean operator&mdash;IS, NOT, 
        AND or OR; not available for UNKNOWN.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. dos Santos Fernandes</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

    </section>

    <section id="rnfb30-general-bugreport">
      <!-- Level 1 section -->

    <title>Bug Reporting</title>
    <para>Bugs fixed since the release of v.3.0.0 are listed and described in the chapter 
    entitled <link linkend="rnfb30-bug">Bugs Fixed</link>.</para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you think you have discovered a new bug in this release, please make a
        point of reading the instructions for bug reporting in the article
        <ulink
          url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/en/how-to-report-bugs/">How
        to Report Bugs Effectively</ulink>, at the Firebird Project website.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you think a bug fix hasn't worked, or has caused a regression, please locate
          the original bug report in the Tracker, reopen it if necessary, and follow the instructions
          below.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>Follow these guidelines as you attempt to analyse your bug:</para>

      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Write detailed bug reports, supplying the exact build number of your Firebird kit. Also
          provide details of the OS platform. Include reproducible test data in your report and post
          it to our <ulink
          url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org">Tracker</ulink>.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>You are warmly encouraged to make yourself known as a field-tester of this pre-release
          by subscribing to the <ulink
          url="mailto:firebird-test-request@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe">field-testers'
          list</ulink> and posting the best possible bug description you can.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>If you want to start a discussion thread about a bug or an
          implementation, please do so by subscribing to the <ulink
          url="mailto:firebird-devel-request@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe">firebird-devel
          list</ulink>.  In that forum you might also see feedback about any tracker ticket you
          post regarding this Beta.</para>
        </listitem>

      </orderedlist>

    </section>

    <section id="rnfb30-general-docs"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <title>Documentation</title>
      <para>You will find all of the README documents referred to in these notes&mdash;as well as many
      others not referred to&mdash;in the doc sub-directory of your Firebird 3.0 installation.</para>

<!-- No longer working 

      <para>An automated &quot;Release Notes&quot; page in the Tracker provides lists and links for all of
      the Tracker tickets associated with this and other pre-release versions.
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?version=10333&amp;styleName=Html&amp;projectId=10000">
      Use this link</ulink>.</para>
-->
      <para><emphasis>--The Firebird Project</emphasis></para>
    </section>
  </chapter>