<chapter id="rnfb30-util">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Monitoring &amp; Command-line Utilities</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>No new monitoring features or other utilities are released with Firebird 3.0.
  Existing features have undergone a few improvements.</para>

  <section id="rnfb30-util-mon$">>
    <title>Monitoring</title>
    <author><firstname>Dmitry</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
    <para>Several changes have been made to the set of virtual tables storing
    the monitoring information.  These are listed in the
    <link linkend="rnfb3-apiods-montables-chgs">System Tables</link> section
    of Chapter 4, <emphasis>Changes to the Firebird API and ODS</emphasis>.</para>

    <note>
      <title>Remote Client Recognition</title>
      <para>From this version forward, the port number of the remote client address for 
      TCPv4 and TCPv6 protocols is included in <function>MON$ATTACHMENTS.MON$REMOTE_ADDRESS</function>. 
      A new column in that table also reports the host name of the remote client.
      For details, see <link linkend="rnfb3-apiods-montables-reporting"><citetitle>Changes to
      Client Address Reporting</citetitle></link> in the same chapter.</para>
    </note>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Tracing</title>
    <para>Latest improvements to the Trace functions include:</para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Trace output now supports showing the explained plan. See Tracker
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4451">CORE-4451</ulink>
        (V. Khorsun).</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>Tracing execution of stored functions.  See Tracker
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4345">CORE-4345</ulink>
        (V. Khorsun).</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>Trace no longer ignores the fact that users from different security databases are
        actually different users. It now <quote>knows</quote> in which security database a
        particular SYSDBA was authenticated or where a privileged user's elevated privileges
        are established.  It is no longer possible, for example, for a user named SYSDBA to access
        <filename>security3.fdb</filename> if it is not currently authenticated for that access.
        See See Tracker
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4851">CORE-4851</ulink> 
        (A. Peshkov).</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

  </section>

  <section>
    <title>gbak</title>
    <section>
      <title>New <quote>Skip Data</quote> Backup Option</title>
      <author><firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      <para><emphasis>gbak</emphasis> has a new option switch--<code> -skip_d(ata) </code> to
      ignore the data from specific tables during a backup.</para>

      <para> The switch -skip_d(ata) accepts a regular expression as its argument.  For example,
      to skip two tables in the employee database (aliased here as 'employee'):</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
 gbak -skip_d '(sales|customer)' employee e1.fbk
      </literallayout>
      <tip>
        <para>The regex used is the SQL one&mdash;the same one that is used for
        Firebird's SIMILAR TO searches.  A guide is available in the DML chapter
        of the v.2.5 release notes and also at the <ulink
        url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/file/documentation/release_notes/html/rlsnotes253.html#rnfb25-dml-regex">Firebird
        web site</ulink>.</para>
      </tip>
    </section>
    <section>
      <title>Long Names for Log Files</title>
      <author><firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      <para>This improvement allows the <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> log to take an extra-long
      name without encountering the message <quote>Attempt to store 256 bytes in a
      clumplet</quote>.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb30-util-gbakstats">
      <title>Run-time Statistics in Verbose Output</title>
      <author><firstname>Vlad</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      <para><emphasis>gbak</emphasis> can now show some runtime statistics in its verbose
      output. A new command-line switch <function>-STATISTICS</function> has been added
      to specify which statistics items should be produced.  Currently, four items are
      implemented:

        <table id="rnfb30-util-tbl-gbakstats" >
        <?dbfo keep-together='auto'?>
          <title>Arguments for <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> STATISTICS Output</title>
          <tgroup cols="3" colsep="0" rowsep="1">
            <colspec colname="c1" colwidth="2*"/>
            <colspec colname="c2" colwidth="*"/>
            <colspec colname="c3" colwidth="3*"/>
            <thead>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Item</entry>
                <entry align="center">Argument</entry>
                <entry align="left">Data Reported</entry>
              </row>
            </thead>
            <tbody>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Total time</entry>
                <entry align="center">T</entry>
                <entry align="left">Time elapsed since the <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> process
                started, in seconds and milliseconds</entry>
              </row>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Time delta</entry>
                <entry align="center">D</entry>
                <entry align="left">Time elapsed since the previous line of output, in seconds and milliseconds</entry>
              </row>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Page reads</entry>
                <entry align="center">R</entry>
                <entry align="left">Number of page reads since the previous line of output, integer</entry>
              </row>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Page writes</entry>
                <entry align="center">W</entry>
                <entry align="left">Number of page writes since the previous line of output, integer</entry>
              </row>
            </tbody>
          </tgroup>
        </table>
      </para>
      <para>At least one item is mandatory for the STATISTICS switch.  The arguments are
      case-insensitive and they can be in any order.  For example, <quote>TDRW</quote>
      and <quote>WdrT</quote> are equivalent.</para>
      <para>The STATISTICS switch will have no effect if the <function>-v[er]</function> switch
      is not specified.</para>

      <para>Verbose output with STATISTICS includes two special lines:
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>a line with headers for the specified statistics, printed before the other
          statistics lines:
            <literallayout class="monospaced">
gbak: time delta reads writes
            </literallayout>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>a line with total statistics summaries for the specified items, printed
          after the end of the main process:
            <literallayout class="monospaced">
gbak: 46.684 0.002 171 82442 total statistics
            </literallayout>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </para>

      <note>
        <para>The feature is fully supported in the Services API with
        <link linkend="rnfb30-api-spb-gbakstats">a new item in the SPB</link> (Services Parameter Block).
        The <emphasis>fbsvcmgr</emphasis> utility also supports the SPB implementation.</para>
      </note>
      <bridgehead renderas="sect4">Examples</bridgehead>
      <orderedlist type="alpha">
        <listitem>Show total time since <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> start:
          <programlisting>
gbak -v -STATISTICS T -b employee emp_bkp.fbk -y log21.log
          </programlisting>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>Show delta time and page reads:
          <programlisting>
... -STAT DR ...
          </programlisting>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>Show all statistics items:
          <programlisting>
... -sta TDRW ...
          </programlisting>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>Sample of <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> verbose output:
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
firebird>gbak -v -stat tdrw -r a.fbk a.fdb
gbak:opened file a.fbk
gbak: time delta reads writes
gbak: 0.173 0.173 0 0 transportable backup -- data in XDR format
gbak: 0.175 0.002 0 0 backup file is compressed
gbak: 0.177 0.001 0 0 backup version is 10
gbak: 0.270 0.092 0 650 created database a.fdb, page_size 8192 bytes
gbak: 0.273 0.002 0 2 started transaction
...
gbak: 18.661 0.002 0 0 restoring data for table TEST1
gbak: 18.698 0.036 0 0 10000 records restored
...
gbak: 25.177 0.036 0 0 1770000 records restored
gbak: 25.220 0.042 0 1633 1780000 records restored
...
gbak: 38.702 0.002 0 0 restoring privilege for user SYSDBA
gbak: 38.707 0.004 22 0 creating indexes
gbak: 45.015 6.308 82 38394 activating and creating deferred index T2_VAL
...
gbak: 46.682 0.008 4 13 finishing, closing, and going home
gbak: 46.684 0.002 171 82442 total statistics
gbak:adjusting the ONLINE and FORCED WRITES flags
          </literallayout>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>
      <formalpara><title>See also</title>
        <para>Tracker ticket <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1999">CORE-1999</ulink></para>
      </formalpara>
    </section> <!-- gbak run-time statistics -->
  </section> <!-- gbak -->

  <section>
    <title>gsec</title>
    <para>The <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> utility is deprecated from Firebird 3 forward.
    This means you are encouraged to use the new <link linkend="rnfb30-access-sql">SQL features
    for managing access</link> described in Chapter 7, <command>Security</command>, in preference
    to existing equivalents provided by <emphasis>gsec</emphasis>.</para>
    <important>
      <para><emphasis>gsec</emphasis> will continue to work with <filename>security3.fdb</filename>.
      However, it does not work with alternative security databases.</para>
    </important>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>isql</title>
    <section id="rnfb30-util-isql-setexplain">
      <title>SET EXPLAIN Extensions for Viewing Detailed Plans</title>
      <author><firstname>Dmitry</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      <para>A new SET option is added: SET EXPLAIN [ON | OFF]. It extends the SET PLAN option to report the
      <link linkend="rnfb30-dml-planoutput">explained plan</link> instead of the standard one.</para>
      <para>If SET PLAN is omitted, then SET EXPLAIN turns the plan output on. SET PLANONLY works as
      in previous versions.</para>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Usage options</emphasis></para>
      <literallayout>
  SET PLAN = simple plan + query execution
  SET PLANONLY = simple plan, no query execution
  SET PLAN + SET EXPLAIN = explained plan + query execution
  SET PLAN + SET EXPLAIN + SET PLANONLY = explained plan, no query execution
  SET EXPLAIN = explained plan + query execution
  SET EXPLAIN + SET PLANONLY = explained plan, no query execution
      </literallayout>
    </section>

    <section>
      <title>Metadata Extract</title>
      <author><firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama C.</surname></author>
      <para>The metadata extract tool (<emphasis>-[e]x[tract]</emphasis> switch) was 
      improved to create a script that takes the dependency order of objects properly into 
      account.</para>

      <para>A label has also been added, reflecting the <emphasis>deterministic</emphasis> 
      flag for stored functions. (A. dos Santos Fernandes)</para>
    </section>

    <section>
      <title>Path to INPUT Files</title>
      <author><firstname>Adriano</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
      <para>The INPUT command will now use a relative path based on the directory of
      the last-opened, unclosed file in the chain to locate the next file.</para>
    </section>

    <section>
      <title>Command Buffer Size Increase</title>
      <author><firstname>Adriano</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
      <para>The size of the <emphasis>isql</emphasis> command buffer has increased from
      64 KB to 10 MB to match the new engine limits.  See Tracker ticket
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4148">CORE-4148</ulink>.</para>
    </section>

    <section>
      <title><emphasis>Deterministic</emphasis> Label for Stored Functions</title>
      <author><firstname>Adriano</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
      <para>A label was added in the <database>SHOW FUNCTION</database> command reflecting the
      <emphasis>deterministic</emphasis> flag for stored functions.</para>
      <para>See Tracker item <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4940">CORE-4940</ulink>.</para>
    </section>
  </section> <!-- isql -->

  <section>
    <title>fb_lock_print</title>
    <section>
      <title>Input Arguments</title>
      <author><firstname>Dmitry</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      <para><emphasis>fb_lock_print</emphasis> now accepts 32-bit integers as the input arguments for
      seconds and intervals. Previously they were limited to SMALLINT.</para>
    </section>
    <section>
      <title>Useability Improvements</title>
      <author><firstname>Vlad</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      <para>A few other small improvements:</para>
      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>More detailed usage help is available from the command line (-help).</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Events history and list of owners are no longer output by default: they may
          be requested explicitly if required.  Header-only is the new default.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>New -o[wners] switch to print only owners (locks) with pending requests</para>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>gfix</title>
    <section>
      <title>-NoLinger Switch</title>
      <author><firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      <para><emphasis>gfix</emphasis> has a new switch <command>-NoLinger</command> to
      provide a one-off override to the LINGER setting of a database.</para>
      <para>For information regarding LINGER, see <link linkend="rnfb30-ddl-enhance-linger">the
      write-up in the DDL chapter</link>.</para>
    </section>
    <section>
      <title>Improvements to Validation Messages</title>
      <author><firstname>Vlad</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Critical validation messages are now split from minor ones</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>The table name is now returned in the text of validation contraint error 
          messages, to help identify the error context</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </section>

  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Other Tweaks</title>
    <para>Some implementation annoyances were cleared up in several utilities.</para>

    <section><!-- L2 -->
    <title>All Command-line Utilities</title>
      <section>
        <title>Resolution of Database Path</title>
        <author><firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
        <para>All utilities resolve database paths in <filename>databases.conf</filename> when
        they need to access a database file directly. But not all of them would follow the same rules
        when expanding a database name. Now, they do.</para>
      </section>
      <section>
        <title>Help and Version Information</title>
        <author><firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama C.</surname></author>
        <para>All command-line utilities except <emphasis>gpre</emphasis> and <emphasis>qli</emphasis>
        now present help and version information in a unified and coherent way.</para>
        <para>No info yet at <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2540">CORE-2540</ulink>.</para>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section><!-- L2 -->
      <title>Hard-coded Messages Replaced</title>
      <author><firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama C.</surname></author>
      <para>Hard-coded messages were replaced with the regular parameterised-style ones
      in <emphasis>tracemanager</emphasis> and <emphasis>nbackup</emphasis>.</para>
    </section>

    <section><!-- L2 -->
      <title>Arbitrary Switch Syntax Clean-up</title>
      <author><firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama C.</surname></author>
      <para>Switch options in <emphasis>qli</emphasis> and <emphasis>nbackup</emphasis> were
      made to check the correctness (or not) of the abbreviated switch options presented.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

</chapter>