<chapter id="rnfb25-compat">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Compatibility Issues</title>
    <author>
      <firstname>Dmitry</firstname>
      <surname>Yemanov</surname>
    </author>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>For migrating v.2.0.x or v.2.1.x databases to Firebird 2.5, a number of incompatibilities that are
  likely to affect existing databases or existing applications should be noted.  It is not recommended that
  you begin a migration until you have resolved these.</para>

  <important>
    <title>Incompatibility with Older Clients</title>
    <para>To enable the 32-bit tools to work correctly with new structures that enable statistics
    routines to work properly with a 64-bit server, it was necessary to introduce some new internal
    API functions (<command>struct perf64</command> and <command>perf64_xxx</command>) and change
    <emphasis>isql</emphasis> and <emphasis>qli</emphasis> to use them. This means that the
    <emphasis>isql</emphasis> and <emphasis>qli</emphasis> programs in V.2.5 are not compatible with
    older Firebird clients.</para>
    <para>For more information, see the topic <link linkend="rnfb25-engine-stats64">Statistics Now
    Work Properly with 64-bit Values</link> in the Engine chapter.</para>
  </important>

  <section id="rnfb25-compat-metadata"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>Effects of Unicode Metadata</title>
    <para>If you have not previously updated text objects within the metadata of your databases to be in
    character set UTF8, restoring a database until V.2.5 will fail with <quote>malformed string</quote>
    errors.  To resolve this it is necessary to pay attention to the files in the
    <filename>/misc/upgrade/metadata</filename> directory of your installation and to use the new
    <filename>-fix_fss_data<filename> and </filename>-fix_fss_metadata</filename> switches in the
    <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> command line.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-compat-config"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>Configuration Parameters Removed</title>
    <para>The deprecated configuration parameters <filename>OldParameterOrdering</filename>
    and <filename>CreateInternalWindow</filename> are no longer supported and have been removed
    from <filename>firebird.conf</filename>.</para>
    <para>Two parameters that allowed tuning of the Lock Manager in previous versions are not
    required with the new Lock Manager implementation and have been removed.  They
    are <filename>LockSemCount</filename> and <filename>LockSignal</filename>.</para>
    <para>The parameter MaxFileSystemCache has been renamed to FileSystemCacheThreshold.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-compat-sql"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>SQL Language Changes</title>
    <para>It will be necessary to pay attention to some changes in the SQL language implementation.</para>

    <section id="rnfb25-compat-sql-reserv"><!-- level 2 -->
    <title>Reserved Words</title>
    <para>While some new reserved keywords are introduced, generally the overall list of reserved words
    has been reduced dramatically by making Firebird's parser grammar allow most of the previously
    reserved non-standard keywords as non-reserved. The list of those still reserved, and of SQL standard
    keywords newly reserved, is available in the chapter <link linkend="rnfb25-reswords">Reserved Words and Changes</link>.  </para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-compat-sql-exec"><!-- level 2 -->
      <title>Execution Results</title>
      <para>Some changes will now cause exceptions during run-time execution of queries, including those that are run during the execution of the <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> utility code (backups and restores).</para>

      <section id="rnfb25-compat-sql-malformed"><!-- level 3 -->
        <title>Malformed String Errors</title>
        <para>Well-formedness checks are now performed on UNICODE_FSS strings and text blobs.
        If new or existing UNICODE_FSS is malformed, it will now cause exceptions at execution
        time.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-compat-sql-setclause"><!-- level 3 -->
        <title>Logic Change in SET Clause</title>
        <para>Previously, when the SET clause of the UPDATE statement assigned new values to
        columns, the new value replaced the old value immediately.  If the same column was assigned
        or assigned to more than once, the current value would be that of the assignment most
        recently done.  In other words, previously, assignment order mattered.</para>
        <para>To bring Firebird in line with the standard, from this version forward, only the
        original value of a column is accessible to any assignment in the SET clause.</para>
        <para>For a period, it is possible to revert to the legacy behavior by setting the
        temporary parameter <link linkend="rnfb25-fbconf-oldset">OldSetClauseSemantics</link>
        in <filename>firebird.conf</filename>.  This parameter will be deprecated and removed
        in future releases.</para>
      </section><!-- level 3 -->
    </section><!-- level 2 -->
  </section><!-- level 1 -->

  <section id="rnfb25-compat-utils"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>Utilities</title>
    <para>Be on the watch for the effects of the following changes to the Firebird command-line
    utilities.</para>

    <section id="rnfb25-compat-utils-lckprt">
      <title>fb_lock_print</title>
      <para>Because v.2.5 maintains separate lock structures for each database on the server,
      <emphasis>fb_lock_print</emphasis> now requires a database path name in order to print the
      lock table. Include the new switch <filename>-d &lt;path name&gt;</filename> in the command
      line to specify <emphasis>the filesystem path</emphasis> to the database you wish to
      analyse.</para>
    </section>
    <important id="fb25-deprecation-warning">
      <title>Deprecated Features with Future Impact</title>
      <para>In anticipation of the dropping of the intrinsic function <command>isc_ddl</command>
      from the Firebird 3 codebase, certain features currently available in the
      <emphasis>gdef</emphasis> and <emphasis>gpre</emphasis>
      tools are deprecated&mdash;meaning that, whilst they may work in V.2.5, they will fail
      in Firebird 3.</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><emphasis>gdef</emphasis> will no longer be supported at all.  Instead,
          <emphasis>isql</emphasis> should be used, with regular DDL commands.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>For <emphasis>gpre</emphasis> pre-processing, replace all DDL operations with</para>
          <literallayout>
          EXEC SQL
            EXECUTE IMMEDIATE &quot;...&quot;
          </literallayout>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>In all custom applications, calls to <command>isc_ddl</command> must be
          replaced with SQL DDL statement requests.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </important>
    
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-compat-api"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>API Changes</title>
    <para>Notice the following changes to the application programming interface (API) that is
    implemented in the client libraries.</para>

    <section id="rnfb25-compat-api-tpb"><!-- level 2 -->
      <title>Rejection of Inconsistent TPB Options</title>
      <para>The API functions <command>isc_start_transaction()</command> and
      <command>isc_start_multiple()</command> will now reject combinations of transaction
      parameter buffer (TPB) items that do not <quote>belong together</quote>.</para>

      <para>For example, a non-zero <emphasis>wait timeout</emphasis> is inconsistent with the
      <emphasis>no wait</emphasis> option;  and <emphasis>no record version</emphasis> is
      inconsistent with any <emphasis>transaction isolation mode</emphasis> other than
      ReadCommitted.  Now, instead of making some arbitrary (and possibly incorrect) assumption
      about the inherent ambiguities, the engine will reject such combinations as invalid.</para>
      <para>For more information, see the topic <link linkend="rnfb25-engine-dgnstcs01">Transaction
       Diagnostics</link> in the chapter <emphasis>Changes in the Firebird Engine</emphasis>.</para>
    </section>
    
    <section id="rnfb25-compat-api-sqlnull"><!-- level 2 -->
      <title>Addition of SQL_NULL Constant</title>
      <para>New SQL_NULL constant was introduced to enable the predication 
      <command>OR ? IS NULL</command> to be recognised and processed with the expected outcome 
      and without engendering the <quote>Data type unknown</quote> exception.  This affects 
      how the XSQLVAR structures are populated for such queries.  For information, refer to the 
      topic <link linkend="rnfb25-dml-orisnull">SOME_COL = ? OR ? IS NULL Predication</link> 
      in the DML chapter.</para>
    </section>
  </section><!-- level 1 -->

  <section id="rnfb25-compat-sec"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>Security Hardening</title>
    <para>The following changes should be noted.</para>

    <section id="rnfb25-compat-sec01">
      <title>No SYSDBA Auto-mapping (Windows)</title>
      <para>In V.2.1, members of administrative Windows groups were mapped to SYSDBA
      by default. From V.2.5 forward, SYSDBA mapping is controlled on per-database basis
      using the new SQL command </para>
      <para><command>ALTER ROLE RDB$ADMIN SET/DROP AUTO ADMIN MAPPING</command></para>
      <para>For more details, refer to <link linkend="rnfb25-security-win-sysdba">the
      chapter on Security</link>.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-compat-sec02">
      <title>Default Authentication Method (Windows)</title>
      <para>In V.2.1, where support for Windows trusted authentication was introduced, the
      default authentication method applied was <firstterm>mixed</firstterm>, i.e., the
      DPB or SPB would accept either native Firebird logins or trusted user logins.  Thus,
      he <emphasis>Authentication</emphasis> parameter in <filename>firebird.conf</filename>
      showed <firstterm>mixed</firstterm> as the default.</para>
      <para>From V.2.5 forward, the default is <firstterm>native</firstterm>.  To have
      <firstterm>mixed</firstterm> or <firstterm>trusted</firstterm>, it is now necessary
      to configure this parameter specifically.</para>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2376">CORE-2376</ulink>)
      </para>
    </section>
  </section>  
  <section id="rnfb25-compat-platform"><!-- level 1 -->
    <title>Known Platform Issues</title>
    <para>Engine and other changes may have some platform-specific effects other than 
    those noted generally.  Known issues are listed below.</para>
    <section id="rnfb25-compat-platform01"><!-- level02 -->
      <title>MacOSX</title>
      <para>To make the new engine work properly under multi-threaded conditions we had to
      use <ulink url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Central_Dispatch">Grand Central Dispatch</ulink>,
      which was first released in MacOSX 10.6 (Snow Leopard).  Thus, MacOSX users should be aware that 
      Firebird 2.5 will run only on MacOSX 10.6 or higher versions.</para>
      <note>
        <para>If you want to use an earlier version of OSX you will need to use earlier versions of 
        Firebird.</para>
      </note>
    </section>
  </section>
</chapter>
