<chapter id="rnfb25-ddl">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Data Definition Language (DDL)</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>V.2.5 brings a few significant additions and enhancements to DDL.</para>

  <section id="rnfb25-ddl-links"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Quick Links</title>
    <itemizedlist spacing="compact">
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-crtusr">CREATE/ALTER/DROP USER</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-altrvw">Syntaxes for Altering Views</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-sspinview">SSP Extension for CREATE VIEW</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-altrcmptd">ALTER Mechanism for Computed Columns</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-grntdby">GRANTED BY Extension for GRANT and REVOKE</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-altrrole">ALTER ROLE</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-rvkall">REVOKE ALL</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-dftcolltn">Default COLLATION Attribute for a Database</link></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-altrchrset">ALTER CHARACTER SET</link></para>
      </listitem>
<!-- Corrected in v.2.5.1 -->
      <listitem>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-crtdb-diffile">The DIFFERENCE FILE Argument for CREATE DATABASE</link></para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    
    <para>Although this release emphasises architectural changes in the movement towards Firebird 3, 
    a number of improvements and extensions have been implemented, in many cases as a response to 
    feature requests in the Tracker.</para>
    
<!-- Added in v.2.5.1 -->
    <warning>
      <title>General Alert</title>
      <para>In v.2.5 and beyond, it is possible to alter the data type of a column, even if the column is
      referenced in a stored procedure or trigger, without an exception being thrown.  Because compiled PSQL 
      is stored statically as a binary representation (<quote>BLR</quote>) in a BLOB, the original BLR 
      survives even a backup and restore.  Being static, the BLR is not updated by the data type change, 
      either.</para>
      <para>This means that BLR that has references to the affected columns from the tables or downstream
      views, together with any variables declared using the TYPE OF syntax with reference to them is more
      than likely to be broken without warning.  At best, the BLR will be flagged as <quote>needing 
      attention</quote> but tests show that the flag is not set under all conditions.</para>
      <para>In short, the engine now no longer stops you from changing the type of a field that has any
      dependencies in compiled PSQL.  It will be a matter for your own change control to identify the 
      affected procedures and triggers and recompile them to accommodate the changes.</para>
    </warning>
<!-- End of v.2.5.1 addition -->

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-storedproc"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
      <title>Visibility of Procedure Definition Changes on Classic</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Dmitry</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2052">CORE-2052</ulink>.</para>
      <para>One such change addressed the problem of the visibility of altered stored procedures
      to other connections to the Classic server.  Now, such changes are made visible to the
      entire server as soon as the modifying transaction has completed its commit.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-crtusr" xreflabel="CREATE/ALTER/DROP USER"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
      <title>CREATE/ALTER/DROP USER</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-696">CORE-696</ulink>.</para>
      <para>In v.2.5, Firebird finally has syntax to enable user accounts on the server
      to be managed by submitting SQL statements when logged in to a regular database.</para>

      <para>The CREATE USER and ALTER USER statements also include the parameters GRANT ADMIN ROLE
      and REVOKE ADMIN ROLE to enable a user with SYSDBA privileges user to grant the RDB$ADMIN role
      in the security database to an ordinary user. For the usage description and a full overview of
      the RDB$ADMIN role, refer to the topic <link linkend="rnfb25-prvlgs">New RDB$ADMIN System Role</link>
      in the <emphasis>Administrative Features</emphasis> chapter.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Patterns</emphasis></para>
      <para>The SYSDBA, or a user with SYSDBA privileges in both the current database and the
      security database, can add a new user:</para>
      <programlisting>
CREATE USER &lt;username&gt; {PASSWORD 'password'}
  [FIRSTNAME 'firstname']
  [MIDDLENAME 'middlename']
  [LASTNAME 'lastname']
  [GRANT ADMIN ROLE];
      </programlisting>
      <note>
        <para>The PASSWORD clause is required when creating a new user.  It should
        be the initial password for that new user. The user can change it later,
        using ALTER USER.</para>
      </note>

      <para>The SYSDBA, or a user with SYSDBA privileges in both the current database 
      and the security database, can change one or more of the password and
      proper name attributes of an existing user.  Non-privileged users can use this
      statement to alter only their own attributes.</para>

      <programlisting>
ALTER USER &lt;username&gt;
  [PASSWORD 'password']
  [FIRSTNAME 'firstname']
  [MIDDLENAME 'middlename']
  [LASTNAME 'lastname']
  [{GRANT | REVOKE} ADMIN ROLE];
      </programlisting>
      <note>
      <!-- V.2.5.1, the text of the first para was changed. -->
        <para>At least one of the optional parameters must be present.</para>
        <para>ALTER USER does not allow the &lt;username&gt; to be changed.  If a different &lt;username&gt; is
        required, the old one should be deleted (dropped) and a new one created.</para>
      </note>
      <para>The SYSDBA, or a user with SYSDBA privileges in both the current database and the
      security database, can delete a user:</para>
      <programlisting>
DROP USER &lt;username&gt;;
      </programlisting>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Restrictions</emphasis></para>
      <para>CREATE USER and DROP USER statements and GRANT | REVOKE ADMIN ROLE are available
      only for the SYSDBA, or a user that has acquired the RDB$ADMIN role in both the current 
      database and the security database.</para>
      <para>An ordinary user can ALTER his own password and elements of his proper name.
      An attempt to modify another user will fail.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>

      <para>SYSDBA or a <link linkend="rnfb25-prvlgs">user with equivalent privileges</link> in both
      the current database and the security database, can do:</para>
      <programlisting>
CREATE USER alex PASSWORD 'test';

ALTER USER alex FIRSTNAME 'Alex' LASTNAME 'Peshkov';

ALTER USER alex PASSWORD 'IdQfA';
      </programlisting>

    </section><!-- Level 2 section -->

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-altrvw"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
      <title>Syntaxes for Altering Views</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
          <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Previously, in order to alter a view definition, it was necessary to save the view definition off-line
      somewhere and drop the view, before recreating it with its changes.  This made things very cumbersome, especially
      if there were dependencies.  V.2.5 introduces syntaxes for ALTER VIEW and CREATE OR ALTER VIEW.</para>

      <para>Tracker references are <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-770">CORE-770</ulink> and
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1640">CORE-1640</ulink>.</para>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-altrvw01"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>ALTER VIEW</title>
        <para>ALTER VIEW enables a view definition to be altered without the need to recreate (drop and create) the old
        version of the view and all of its dependencies.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-altrvw02"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>CREATE OR ALTER VIEW</title>
        <para>With CREATE OR ALTER VIEW, the view definition will be altered (as with ALTER VIEW) if it exists, or
        created if it does not exist. </para>
      </section>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Pattern</emphasis></para>
<!-- v.2.5.1 Added starting brace character { before the first word 'create' -->
      <programlisting>
{create [ or alter ] | alter } view &lt;view_name&gt;
  [ ( &lt;field list&gt; ) ]
as &lt;select statement&gt;
      </programlisting>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
create table users (
    id integer,
    name varchar(20),
    passwd varchar(20)
);

create view v_users as
    select name from users;

alter view v_users (id, name) as
    select id, name from users;
      </programlisting>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-createview"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Extensions for CREATE VIEW</title>
      <para>The following extensions have been added for CREATE VIEW.</para>
      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-sspinview"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>Specify Stored Procedure in FROM Clause</title>
          <author>
            <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
            <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
          </author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-886">CORE-886</ulink>.</para>
        <para>A selectable stored procedure can now be specified in the FROM clause of a view definition.</para>
        <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
    create view a_view as
    select * from a_procedure(current_date);
        </literallayout>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-unioninview"><!-- Level 4 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>Create UNION View Without Column List</title>
          <author>
            <firstname>Dmitry</firstname>
            <surname>Yemanov</surname>
          </author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>Tracker reference
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1402">CORE-1402</ulink>.</para>
        <para>The column list can now be omitted from CREATE VIEW when the set is defined by
        a UNION.</para>
        <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 recreate view V1 as
   select d.rdb$relation_id from rdb$database d
   union all
   select d.rdb$relation_id from rdb$database d

 recreate view V2 as
   select d.rdb$relation_id as q from rdb$database d
   union all
   select d.rdb$relation_id as w from rdb$database d
        </literallayout>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-inferviewcols"><!-- Level 4 section -->
        <sectioninfo>
          <title>Inferred Column Names</title>
          <author>
            <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
            <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
          </author>
        </sectioninfo>
        <para>Tracker reference
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2424">CORE-2424</ulink>.</para>
        <para>CREATE VIEW now has the capability to infer column names for views involving a
        GROUP BY clause or a derived table.</para>
        <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 create view V as 
   select d.rdb$relation_id from rdb$database d 
     group by d.rdb$relation_id

 create view V as 
    select a from (select 1 a from rdb$database);
        </literallayout>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-altrcmptd"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
      <title>ALTER Mechanism for Computed Columns</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
          <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1454">CORE-1454</ulink>.</para>
      <para>A column defined as COMPUTED BY &lt;expression&gt; can now be altered using the ALTER TABLE...ALTER COLUMN
      syntax.  This feature can be used only to change the &lt;expression&gt; element of the column definition to a
      different expression.  It cannot convert a computed column to non-computed or vice versa.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Pattern</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
alter table &lt;table-name&gt;
  alter &lt;computed-column-name&gt;
  [type &lt;data-type&gt;]
  COMPUTED BY (&lt;expression&gt;);
      </programlisting>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
create table test (
  n integer,
  dn computed by (n * 2)
);
commit;
alter table test
  alter dn computed by (n + n);
      </programlisting>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-sqlperms"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
      <title>Extensions for SQL Permissions</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Alex</firstname>
          <surname>Peshkov</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The following extensions have been implemented in the area of SQL permissions
      (privileges).</para>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-grntdby"><!-- Level 3 section -->
<!-- v.2.5.1 Several changes in this section - study carefully wrong references to 
     GRANTED AS in v.2.5.0 and alpha/beta notes. -->
        <title>GRANTED BY Clause</title>
        <!-- v.2.5.1 Note changes to the text -->
        <para>A GRANTED BY (or its alternative, AS) clause can now be optionally included 
        in GRANT and REVOKE statements, enabling the grantor to be a user other than the
        CURRENT_USER (the default).</para>

        <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Pattern</emphasis></para>
        <programlisting>
grant &lt;right&gt; to &lt;object&gt;
  [ { granted by | as } [ user ] &lt;username&gt; ]
--
revoke &lt;right&gt; from &lt;object&gt;
  [ { granted by | as } [ user ] &lt;username&gt; ]
        </programlisting>

        <tip>
          <literallayout>
  { granted by | as }
          </literallayout>
          <para>GRANTED BY and AS are equivalent.  GRANTED BY is the form recommended
          by the SQL standard.  We support AS for compatibility with some other servers
          (Informix, for example).</para>
        </tip>

        <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
        <para>Logged in as SYSDBA:</para>
        <programlisting>
create role r1; -- SYSDBA owns the role
  /* next, SYSDBA grants the role to user1
     with the power to grant it to others */
grant r1 to user1 with admin option;
  /* SYSDBA uses GRANTED BY to exercise
     user1's ADMIN OPTION */
grant r1 to public granted by user1;
      </programlisting>

        <para>In isql, we look at the effects:</para>
        <literallayout>
  SQL&gt;show grant;
  /* Grant permissions for this database */
  GRANT R1 TO PUBLIC GRANTED BY USER1
  GRANT R1 TO USER1 WITH ADMIN OPTION
  SQL&gt;
        </literallayout>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-altrrole"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>ALTER ROLE</title>
        <para>Tracker reference
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1660">CORE-1660</ulink>.</para>
        <para>The new ALTER ROLE statement has a specialised function to control the assignment
        of SYSDBA permissions to Windows administrators during trusted authentication.  It has
        no other purpose currently.</para>

        <note>
          <para>For the <link linkend="rnfb25-prvlgs-automap-altrole">usage description 
          of ALTER ROLE</link> and a full overview of the RDB$ADMIN role, refer to the 
          topic <link linkend="rnfb25-prvlgs">New RDB$ADMIN System Role</link> in 
          the <emphasis>Administrative Features</emphasis> chapter.</para>
        </note>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-rvkall"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>REVOKE ALL</title>
        <para>Tracker reference
        <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-21130">CORE-2113</ulink>.</para>
        <para>When a user is removed from the security database or another authentication
        source, such as the operating system ACL, any associated cleanup of SQL privileges
        in databases has to be performed manually.  This extension adds the capability to 
        revoke all privileges in one stroke from a particular user or role.</para>

        <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Pattern</emphasis></para>
        <programlisting>
REVOKE ALL ON ALL FROM { &lt;user list&gt; | &lt;role list&gt; }
        </programlisting>

        <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
        <para>Logged in as SYSDBA:</para>
        <programlisting>
# gsec -del guest
# isql employee
fbs bin # ./isql employee
Database:  employee
SQL&gt; REVOKE ALL ON ALL FROM USER guest;
SQL&gt;
        </programlisting>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-dftcolltn"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Default COLLATION Attribute for a Database</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
          <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker references <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1737">CORE-1737</ulink> and
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1803">CORE-1803</ulink>.</para>
      <para>An ODS 11.2 or higher database can now have a default COLLATION attribute associated with the default
      character set, enabling all text column, domain and variable definitions to be created with the same collation
      order unless a COLLATE clause for a different collation is specified.</para>

      <para>The COLLATION clause is optional.  If it is omitted, the default collation order for the character set is
      used.</para>

      <tip>
        <para>Note also that the default collation order for a character set used in a database can now also be changed,
         thanks to the introduction of syntax for <link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-altrchrset">ALTER CHARACTER
         SET</link>.</para>
       </tip>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Pattern</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
create database &lt;file name&gt;
    [ page_size &lt;page size&gt; ]
    [ length = &lt;length&gt; ]
    [ user &lt;user name&gt; ]
    [ password &lt;user password&gt; ]
    [ set names &lt;charset name&gt; ]
    [ default character set &lt;charset name&gt;
       [ [ collation &lt;collation name&gt; ] ]
    [ difference file &lt;file name&gt; ]
      </programlisting>

      <note>
        <para>The parameter <command>DIFFERENCE FILE</command> is not a new one for CREATE 
        DATABASE.  It was quietly introduced in association with the <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis> utility
        in V.2.0 and has been lurking undocumented for three years.  For more information, see
        <link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-crtdb">Evolution of CREATE DATABASE</link> at the end of this chapter.</para>
      </note>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
create database 'test.fdb'
    default character set win1252
    collation win_ptbr;
      </programlisting>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-altrchrset"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>ALTER CHARACTER SET Command</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
          <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1803">CORE-1803</ulink>.</para>
      <para>New syntax introduced in this version, enabling the default collation for a character set to be set for a
      database.</para>
      <para>The default collation is used when table columns are created with a given character set (explicitly,
      through a CHARACTER SET clause in the column or domain definition, or implicitly, through the default character
      set attribute of the database) and no COLLATION clause is specified.</para>
      <note>
        <para>String constants also use the default collation of the connection character set.</para>
        <para>The character set and collation of existing columns are not affected by ALTER CHARACTER 
        SET changes.</para>
      </note>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Syntax Pattern</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
ALTER CHARACTER SET &lt;charset_name&gt;
    SET DEFAULT COLLATION &lt;collation_name&gt;
      </programlisting>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
create database 'people.fdb'
  default character set win1252;

alter character set win1252
  set default collation win_ptbr;

create table person (
  id integer,
  name varchar(50)  /* will use the database default
                       character set and the win1252
                       default collation */
);

insert into person
  values (1, 'adriano');
insert into person
  values (2, 'ADRIANO');

/* will retrieve both records
   because win_ptbr is case insensitive */
select * from person where name like 'A%';
      </programlisting>

      <tip>
        <para><link linkend="rnfb25-engine-mtdta01">Another improvement</link>
        allows the current value of RDB$DEFAULT_COLLATE_NAME in the system table
        RDB$CHARACTER_SETS to survive the backup/restore cycle.</para>
      </tip>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-ddl-crtdb"><!-- Level 2 section -->

      <title>Evolution of CREATE DATABASE</title>

      <para>DDL support for the database header attributes introduced to register and
      change the nBackup states has been evolving since Firebird 2.0. Users of nBackup
      will be familiar with the ALTER DATABASE statements to begin and end the storage
      of the <quote>delta</quote> data, in a file apart from the main database, during 
      a full <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis>.</para>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-crtdb-delta"><!-- Level 3 -->
        <title>Naming the Delta File for nBackup</title>
        <para>ALTER DATABASE also has another argument that allows you to set the name
        that will be used for the file that stores the delta data.  To quote from Paul
        Vinkenoog's excellent manual for <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis>:</para>

        <para>By default, the delta file lives in the same directory as the database itself.
        It also has the same name as the database file, but with <command>.delta</command>
        appended. There is usually no reason to change this, but it can be done if need
        be&mdash;though not via nbackup itself.</para>
        <para>Make a connection to the database with any client that allows you to enter
        your own SQL statements and give the command:</para>
        <programlisting>
alter database
  add difference file &apos;path-and-filename&apos;
        </programlisting>
        <para>The custom delta file specification is persistent in the database; it is stored
        in the system table <filename>RDB$FILES</filename>.</para>
        <para>To revert to the default behaviour, issue the following statement:</para>
        <programlisting>
alter database
  drop difference file
        </programlisting>
        <para>Those who are still curious may study the details in the V.2.0 release notes or in
        the <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis> manual.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-ddl-crtdb-diffile"><!-- Level 3 -->
        <title>The DIFFERENCE FILE Argument for CREATE DATABASE</title>
        <author><firstname>C.</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname></author>

        <para>In Firebird 2.0, syntax for prescribing a custom name for the delta file appeared
        as an extra, optional argument for CREATE DATABASE.  You can observe its placement in the
        <link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-dftcolltn">syntax pattern given above</link> for the topic
        <emphasis>Default COLLATION Attribute for a Database</emphasis>.  As with ALTER DATABASE,
        the keyword for the argument is DIFFERENCE FILE and the argument is a valid file
        specification.  It allows you to specify a custom name for the delta file that will be
        created whenever ALTER DATABASE BEGIN BACKUP is called, or when the equivalent
        <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis> shell command is invoked.</para>

        <para><emphasis role="bold">Examples of Usage</emphasis></para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  &rsqb;..\bin&gt; isql -user sysdba -pass masterke

 Use CONNECT or CREATE DATABASE to specify a database
 SQL&gt; create database 'ticks' difference file 'jaguar';
 SQL&gt; shell dir jaguar;
 Volume in drive F is Firebird
 Volume Serial Number is BCD9-4211

 Directory of ..\bin

 File Not Found
        </literallayout>

        <para>This is correct, we only defined the file name.  Now it will be used:</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 SQL&gt; alter database begin backup;
 SQL&gt; shell dir jaguar;
 Volume in drive F is Firebird
 Volume Serial Number is BCD9-4211

 Directory of ..\bin

 10-11-2009  00:59             8.192 jaguar
                1 File(s)          8.192 bytes
                0 Dir(s)  16.617.979.904 bytes free

 SQL&gt; alter database end backup;
 SQL&gt; shell dir jaguar;
 Volume in drive F is Firebird
 Volume Serial Number is BCD9-4211

 Directory of ..\bin

 SQL&gt; drop database;
 SQL&gt; &circ;Z
        </literallayout>

        <para>Since the argument is a file name, it goes inside single quotes. Double-quotes
        are not valid:  the statement will fail and return a confusing error message.</para>

        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 &rsqb;..\bin&gt; isql -user sysdba -pass masterke

 Use CONNECT or CREATE DATABASE to specify a database
 SQL&gt; create database 'ticks' DIFFERENCE FILE 'jaguar';
 SQL&gt; alter database add difference file 'leopard';

 Statement failed, SQLCODE = -607
 unsuccessful metadata update
 -Difference file is already defined
        </literallayout>
        <para>The message is correct. Even though the delta was deleted by the
        ALTER DATABASE END BACKUP call, the name of the difference file is stored
        persistently and only one may exist.</para>

        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 SQL&gt; alter database drop difference file;
 SQL&gt; alter database begin backup;
         </literallayout>
 <!-- V.2.5.1 Removed this section because it was fixed after the documentation
     was written

 Statement failed, SQLCODE = -607
 unsuccessful metadata update
 -STORE RDB$FILES failed
 -message length error (encountered 278, expected 276)
        </literallayout>
        <para>It is not a user friendly message but it means we have no difference
        file.  Perhaps curiously, the engine does not rescue the situation and
        create the delta using the default mechanism.</para>
-->
<!-- Added the following in v.2.5.1 notes -->
        <para>This does not break anything, because the engine will rescue the 
        situation and create the delta using the default mechanism.</para>
<!-- End v.2.5.1 addition -->        
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 SQL&gt; alter database add difference file 'leopard';
 SQL&gt; alter database begin backup;
 SQL&gt; alter database drop difference file;

 Statement failed, SQLCODE = -607
 unsuccessful metadata update
 -Cannot change difference file name while database is in backup mode
        </literallayout>
        <para>This is correct validation.</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
 SQL&gt; alter database end backup;
 SQL&gt; drop database;
 SQL&gt; &circ;Z
        </literallayout>
      </section><!-- sect3 -->
    </section><!-- sect2 -->

  </section>

</chapter>