  <chapter id="rnfb25-general">
    <chapterinfo>
      <title>General Notes</title>
    </chapterinfo>
    
<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.9, 2019.06.06 -->
    <section id="notes-259"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.9 Sub-release</title>
      <para>This sub-release comes with a significant list of <link linkend="bug-259">bug fixes</link>.</para>

      <section id="notes-259-improvemts"><!-- Level 2 -->
        <title>V. 2.5.9 Improvements</title>
        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5853">CORE-5853</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>Two new context variables 
        <code>LOCALTIME</code> and <code>LOCALTIMESTAMP</code> that are synonyms for 
        <code>CURRENT_TIME</code> and <code>CURRENT_TIMESTAMP</code>, respectively.  They can be
        used in this sub-release and in Firebird 3.0.4 and later, for forward-compatibility with 
        Firebird 4. See <link linkend="rnfb259-local-context-vars">Context Variables LOCALTIME and
        LOCALTIMESTAMP</link> for details.</para>
        <para><emphasis>Implemented by A. dos Santos Fernandes</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5434">CORE-5434</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>A read-only transaction will no longer 
        force write the Header\TIP page content to disk immediately after a change. This improvement 
        gives a significant performance gain where there are numerous light read-only transactions. 
        At this stage, it affects only Superserver. For Classic and Superclassic it is more complex to 
        implement and should appear in Firebird 4.0.</para>
        <para><emphasis>Implemented by V. Khorsun</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2493">CORE-2493</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function> The IP address of the remote host is 
        now appended to error messages in firebird.log for TCP connections.</para>
        <para><emphasis>Implemented by V. Khorsun</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

      </section>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.8, 2018.01.01 -->
    <section id="notes-258"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.8 Sub-release</title>
      <para>This sub-release comes with a significant list of <link linkend="bug-258">bug fixes</link>.</para>

      <section id="notes-258-improvemts"><!-- Level 2 -->
        <title>V. 2.5.8 Improvements</title>
        
        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5674">CORE-5674</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>Common Table Expressions are now 
        allowed to be left unused.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by V. Khorsun</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5640">CORE-5640</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>Multiple simultaneous new connections to 
        a database in Superclassic no longer cause a response bottleneck for one another.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. Peshkov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5629">CORE-5629</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>Output from <emphasis>gstat</emphasis>
        now includes the date and time of analysis.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by A. Peshkov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5543">CORE-5543</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>Restoring a pre ODS 11.1 database 
        now correctly populates RDB$RELATION_TYPE field in the metadata.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by D. Yemanov</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

      </section>
    </section>
    
<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.7, 2017.01.01 -->
    <section id="notes-257"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.7 Sub-release</title>
      <para>This sub-release comes with a handful of <link linkend="bug-257">bug fixes</link>,
      including addressing a <emphasis role="bold">serious security vulnerability</emphasis> 
      present in all preceding Firebird 2.5 releases.
      <warning>
        <para>The exploit is available to authenticated users only, somewhat limiting the risks.
         However, it is strongly recommended that any previous V.2.5.x installation be upgraded
         to this one without delay.</para>
      </warning>
      </para>

      <section id="notes-257-improvemts"><!-- Level 2 -->
        <title>Improvements</title>
        
        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5475">CORE-5475</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>It is now possible to filter
        out info and warnings from the trace log.</para>
        <para><emphasis>implemented by V. Khorsun</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>

        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4563">CORE-4563</ulink>)
        </emphasis><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function>Support was added for fast/low-latency 
        <quote>TCP Loopback Fast Path</quote> functionality introduced in Windows 8 and Server 2012.</para>
        <para>This feature is said to improve the performance of the TCP stack for local loopback
        connections, by short-circuiting the TCP stack for local calls. The details of the feature can 
        be found in <ulink url="http://tinyurl.com/za6tvch">this Microsoft Technet blog</ulink>.</para>
        <para><emphasis>Implemented by V. Khorsun</emphasis></para>
        <para><function>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;~ ~ ~ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</function></para>
      </section>
     </section>
    
<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.6, 2016.06.23 -->
    <section id="notes-256"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.6 Sub-release</title>
      <para>This sub-release comes with a few <link linkend="bug-256">bug fixes</link> and 
      a couple of improvements:
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>Run-time errors raised inside EXECUTE BLOCK now provide the location context
          (line and column numbers).  Backport from Firebird 3 by D. Yemanov.  For more info,
          see <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-5216">Tracker ticket
          CORE-5216</ulink>.
          </listitem>
          <listitem>Previously, when a restore failed to activate and recreate a deferred index, 
          typically because of insufficient temporary disk space, <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> would 
          return a non-zero completion code (<quote>FAIL</quote>) only when the failure affected a
          referential constraint. Now, <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> returns a fail code for any 
          index that fails the activate-and-rebuild step. This improvement should be particularly 
          helpful where backups and restores are managed using scripts, enabling indexes left 
          inactive after the restore to be caught and corrected.
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </para>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.5, 2015.09.23 -->
    <section id="notes-255"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.5 Sub-release</title>
      <para>This sub-release comes with a moderate collection of <link linkend="bug-255">bugs fixed</link> over
      the past six months or so.</para>
      <para>Vlad Khorsun's improvement for <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> in Firebird 3.0, producing run-time 
      statistics in the verbose output, was backported to this v.2.5.5 sub-release.  For more information, 
      see <link linkend="rnfb25-util-gbakstats">Run-time Statistics in Verbose Output</link> and 
      <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-spb-gbakstats">SPB Support for New Statistics Feature in <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> 
      Output</link>.</para>
      <para>One of Firebird's oldest
      bugs&mdash;<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-214">CORE-214</ulink>&mdash;was 
      finally fixed: COUNT(DISTINCT ...) was too slow (until now!)</para>
      <bridgehead renderas="sect4">Firebird 2.5 Language Reference</bridgehead>
      <para>The recently-completed translation of the <citetitle>Firebird 2.5 Language Reference</citetitle> 
      manual from Russian to English is undergoing technical review as this sub-release is being prepared.  
      Watch the news items at <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org">the Firebird website</ulink> for the 
      announcement of its release.</para>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.4, 2015.03.26 -->
    <section id="notes-254"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.4 Sub-release</title>
      <para>This sub-release of Firebird 2.5 adds one useful new feature and an improvement in the
      management of internal BLOBs:</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>From this sub-release forward, it is now possible to perform table and index validation
          whilst the database is on-line.</para>
          <para><emphasis>For details, refer to the topic
          <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-onlinevalidation">Perform Some Validation Services On-line</link>
          in the chapter entitled <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods">Changes to the Firebird API and ODS</link></emphasis>.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-4671">CORE-4671</ulink>)
          </emphasis>: Internal BLOBs are released earlier, to free up memory and disk space.</para>
          <para><emphasis>Implemented by Vlad Khorsun</emphasis></para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>A collection of bugs fixed since the v.2.5.3 sub-releases is described
      <link linkend="bug-254">here</link>.</para>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.3, Security Update 1 2014.12.04 -->
    <section id="notes-253_su1"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.3 Security Update 1</title>
      <para>The Superserver and Superclassic servers could crash with a segmentation fault caused by a
      malformed network packet, opening a vulnerability.  It does not affect the Classic server.</para>
      <para>The vulnerability was patched by Alex Peshkov.  All Firebird Superserver and Superclassic
      binaries released with build numbers 26778 or lower and all SS and SC snapshot builds before
      2014.12.03 have this vulnerability.</para>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.3 -->
    <section id="notes-253"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.3 Sub-release</title>
      <warning>
        <title>Warning re Databases Created or Restored under Firebird 2.5.1</title>
        <para>All users upgrading from Firebird 2.5.1 to a higher sub-release are strongly advised
        to migrate databases using <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> backup/restore.  If this is impracticable, at least
        rebuild all compound indices in the databases being migrated.</para>
        <para>Databases being upgraded from older Firebird versions (ODS 11.1 and lower) or v.2.5.0 are not
        affected by this regression.</para>
      </warning>

      <para>This sub-release of Firebird 2.5 adds no new features but includes a large collection
      of <link linkend="bug-253">bug fixes</link> that have accumulated since V.2.5.2.  A few minor improvements
      appear in this sub-release, viz.</para>
      <itemizedlist>

        <listitem>
          <para>New context variables have been added
          to the SYSTEM namespace to retrieve more information about the current connection and current
          transaction.</para>
          <para>The added variables: SYSTEM::CLIENT_PID and SYSTEM::CLIENT_PROCESS for the current connection,
          SYSTEM::LOCK_TIMEOUT and SYSTEM::READ_ONLY for the current transaction.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Some limits have increased:</para>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>The maximum number of connections on Windows for Superserver and Superclassic
              has been raised from 1024 to 2048 connections.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>The maximum number of input parameters for external functions (UDFs) has
              increased to 15.</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Error reporting improvements, including:</para>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>More details are now reported for <quote>object in use</quote> errors.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>The relation name is now added to the text of validation constraint error
              messages, to help identify the error context.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>Error reporting for index and constraint violations has been extended
              to include the problematic key value.</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Physical backup (using ALTER DATABASE BEGIN/END BACKUP or the <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis>
          utility) was improved to speed up extension of the main database file when
          backup state changes from <emphasis>stalled</emphasis> to <emphasis>merge</emphasis>.</para>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem><para>Contention for the allocation table lock while a database is in
              the <emphasis>stalled</emphasis> physical backup state has been reduced.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>Faster file growth has been enabled on Linux systems that
              support <command>fallocate()</command>.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>Attachments no longer block others when the allocation table is being read for
              the first time.</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Execution of a SET STATISTICS INDEX statement no longer blocks or
          slows down concurrent attachments.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>The scan for limbo transactions at the end of a sweep has
          been improved.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Support for the UPDATE OR INSERT statement and the RETURNING clause have been
          implemented for Embedded SQL (ESQL).</para>
        </listitem>

      </itemizedlist>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.2, Security Update 2013.03.18 -->
    <section id="notes-252_su1"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.2 Security Update 1</title>
      <para>A remote stack buffer overflow was discovered in the Firebird Server during March, 2013, that
      allows an unauthenticated user to crash the server and opens a gate for remote code execution.</para>
      <para>The vulnerability was patched by Alex Peshkov.  All Firebird binaries released with build numbers 26539
       or lower and all snapshot builds before 2013.03.08 have this vulnerability.</para>
    </section>

<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.2 -->
    <section id="notes-252"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.2 Sub-release</title>
      <para>An important change was made to the implementation of the GEN_UUID() function to make it comply
      properly with the requirements of RFC-4122.  For more information, refer to
      <link linkend="rnfb25-dml-genuuid">this topic</link>.</para>
      <para>A bug was corrected that caused faulty byte or character order in the results of the functions
      <link linkend="rnfb25-dml-uuid01">CHAR_TO_UUID</link> and <link linkend="rnfb25-dml-uuid02">UUID_TO_CHAR</link>
      on big-Endian platforms.  This correction will impact code that called those functions on big-Endian hosts in
      Firebird 2.5 or 2.5.1.</para>

      <para>As well as many more <link linkend="bug-252">bug fixes</link> accumulated over the months since v.2.5.1,
      this sub-release provides a few minor improvements, particularly of help to administrators. In summary:</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Some welcome improvements were made to the Trace services, viz.,</para>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>Sessions can now be configured to log user and automatic sweep activity.  Documentation
              for this option can be found on the Tracker
              ticket <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3656">CORE-3656</ulink>.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>TRACE now produces statistics of actions that happen after a transaction has finished.
              See Tracker ticket <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3598">CORE-3598</ulink>.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>TRACE now provides the ability to log errors that occur in runtime (lock conflicts,
              key violations, et al.).  See Tracker 
              ticket <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3539">CORE-3539</ulink>.</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>It is now possible to use the API to do a remote backup/restore.</para>
          <para>See <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-svcrembackup">Back Up to or Restore from a Remote
          Backup File</link>.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>A note is now written into <filename>firebird.log</filename> when an automatic sweep is 
          started.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Support was added for C preprocessor flags in the Firebird build system.</para>
        </listitem>

      </itemizedlist>
    </section>
<!-- Sub-release v.2.5.1 -->
    <section id="notes-251"><!-- Level 1 -->
      <title>Firebird 2.5.1 Sub-release</title>
      <para>As well as a substantial number of bug fixes, this sub-release takes in a few minor
      improvements and optimizations that missed the initial release.  In summary:</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Significant for MacOSX 10.7 users was a bug that caused attempts to start Superserver
          and Superclassic to fail. The bug is described in
          <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3589">Tracker ticket CORE-3589</ulink>
          and also in the <link linkend="bug-251-posix">Bug Fixes list</link> for this sub-release.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>An SQLSTATE context variable is now available in PSQL, parallel to the the context variables
          GDSCODE and SQLCODE that are used in WHEN blocks to test for error conditions.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>A couple of improvements were made, that should help performance when global temporary
          tables (GTTs) are being used:</para>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>The <quote>undoing</quote>, on rolling back the transaction, of changes made to GTTs
              that were created with the ON COMMIT DELETE ROWS option was an unnecessary overhead and
              has been bypassed.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>Garbage collection in global temporary tables was being delayed unnecessarily by
              active transactions in other attachments.  That bottleneck is gone.</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>A needed optimization in the temporary space manager with regard to small chunk allocations
          has been implemented.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>The Lock Manager has been provided with the capability to cancel waiting, avoiding
          a condition whereby a transaction in WAIT mode could wait interminably for the end of
          another transaction that could not be achieved by either a <command>DELETE FROM MON$xxx</command>
          or an <command>fb_cancel_operation</command> request.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>The query optimizer now estimates the actual record compression ratio, enabling better
          guesses about the number of stored records in tables.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Some minor improvements to the remote interface:</para>
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>Any unused bytes of varchar values in the message buffer are now set to zero.</para>
            </listitem>
            <listitem>
              <para>Set the SO_KEEPALIVE option on the client TCP socket</para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>The MON$STATEMENT_ID value constant is now kept constant among monitoring snapshots.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Ports of this sub-release were done for Linux/HPPA and Linux/alpha platforms.</para>
        </listitem>


      </itemizedlist>
    </section>
    <section id="rnfb25-general-bugreport">
      <!-- Level 1 section -->

    <title>Bug Reporting</title>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you think you have discovered a new bug in this release, please make a
        point of reading the instructions for bug reporting in the article
        <ulink
          url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/en/how-to-report-bugs/">How
        to Report Bugs Effectively</ulink>, at the Firebird Project website.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you think a bug fix hasn't worked, or has caused a regression, please locate
          the original bug report in the Tracker, reopen it if necessary, and follow the instructions
          below.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>Follow these guidelines as you attempt to analyse your bug:</para>

      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Write detailed bug reports, supplying the exact build number of your Firebird kit. Also
          provide details of the OS platform. Include reproducible test data in your report and post
          it to our <ulink
          url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org">Tracker</ulink>.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>You are warmly encouraged to make yourself known as a field-tester of this pre-release
          by subscribing to the <ulink
          url="mailto:firebird-test-request@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe">field-testers'
          list</ulink> and posting the best possible bug description you can.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>If you want to start a discussion thread about a bug or an
          implementation, please do so by subscribing to the <ulink
          url="mailto:firebird-devel-request@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe">firebird-devel
          list</ulink>.  In that forum you might also see feedback about any tracker ticket you
          post regarding this alpha.</para>
        </listitem>

      </orderedlist>

    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-general-docs"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <title>Documentation</title>
      <para>You will find all of the README documents referred to in these notes&mdash;as well as many 
      others not referred to&mdash;in the doc sub-directory of your Firebird 2.5 installation.</para>
      <para>An automated &quot;Release Notes&quot; page in the Tracker provides lists and links for all of 
      the Tracker tickets associated with this and other pre-release versions.
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?version=10333&amp;styleName=Html&amp;projectId=10000">
      Use this link</ulink>.</para>

      <para><emphasis>--The Firebird Project</emphasis></para>
    </section>
  </chapter>