<chapter id="rnfb25-intl">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>International Language Support (INTL)</title>
    <author>
      <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
      <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
    </author>
  </chapterinfo>

  <para>Some improvements appear in this release to tighten and enhance Firebird's handling capabilities for
  international language environment.</para>

  <section id="rnfb25-intl-dftcolltn"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Default COLLATION Attribute for a Database</title>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Databases of ODS 11.2 and higher can now optionally be created with a default collation associated with the
    default character set.  For details, please see <link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-dftcolltn">Default COLLATION Attribute
    for a Database</link> in the DDL chapter.</para>
  </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-intl-altrchrset"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>ALTER CHARACTER SET Command</title>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>DDL syntax has been introduced to enable the default collation for a character set to be set at database
    level.  For details, please see <link linkend="rnfb25-ddl-altrchrset">ALTER CHARACTER SET
    Command</link> in the DDL chapter.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-intl-conncharset"><!-- Level 1 -->
    <title>Connection Strings &amp; Character Sets</title>
    <para>Capability has been implemented in the API database connection (DPB) area to interoperate with 
    the character set and/or code page of server and client, to avoid the previous problems that could 
    occur when file names contained non-ASCII characters.</para>
    <para>Refer to the topic <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-conncharset">Connection
    Strings &amp; Character Sets</link> in the chapter <emphasis>Changes to the Firebird API
    and ODS</emphasis>. Even if you are not normally interested in the API, this topic will
    be a worthwhile read if you have been bothered with such issues.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-intl-other"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Other Improvements</title>
    
    <section id="rnfb25-intl-introducer"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Introducer Syntax Usage</title>
      <para>The usage of introducer syntax, i.e., prefixing an underscore to a character set name, to force 
      the succeeding text literal to transliterated to that character set, has caused some problems in 
      situations where a single SQL statement entails usage of more than one character set.  The actual 
      problems differ from version to version, showing up as transliteration errors, malformed string errors 
      or just as some kind of unexpected behaviour.</para>
      
      <para>Problems could occur in two different usage scenarios.-</para>
      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>One query is employing the introducer syntax when another query perfoms a select from MON$STATEMENTS</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Introducer syntax was used in a PSQL module</para>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>
      <para>To enable a workaround for such problems, it is now possible to transform the
      literal string into the hex representation of the ASCII characters being submitted by the 
      introducer. For example:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">

    select _dos850 &apos;123&aacute;&eacute;456&apos; from rdb$database
      </literallayout>
      <para>may be transformed to</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">

    select _dos850 X&apos;313233A082343536&apos; from rdb$database
      </literallayout>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-intl-malf"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Malformed UNICODE_FSS Characters Disallowed</title>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1600">CORE-1600</ulink>.</para>
      <para>Malformed characters are no longer allowed in data for UNICODE_FSS columns.</para>
    </section><!-- sect2 -->

    <section id="rnfb25-intl-fixfss"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Repair Switches for Malformed Strings</title>
      <para>New restore switches were added to the <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> utility code for the purpose of repairing
      malformed UNICODE_FSS data and metadata by restoring a backup of the affected database.  Details are in the
      <link linkend="rnfb25-utils-gbak-fix01"><emphasis>gbak</emphasis> section</link> of the Utilities chapter.</para>
    </section><!-- sect2 -->

    <section id="rnfb25-intl-numsort"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Numeric Sort Attributes</title>
      <para>Tracker reference: <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1945">CORE-1945</ulink>)
      </para>
      <para>For UNICODE collations only, a custom attribute NUMERIC-SORT has been enabled for
      specifying the order by which to sort numerals.</para>
      
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Format &amp; Usage</emphasis></para>
      <literallayout>
  NUMERIC-SORT={0 | 1}
      </literallayout>
      <para>The default, 0, sorts numerals in alphabetical order.  For example:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
    1
    10
    100
    2
    20
      </literallayout>
      <para>1 sorts numerals in numerical order.  For example:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
    1
    2
    10
    20
    100
      </literallayout>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Example</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
create collation unicode_num for utf8
from unicode 'NUMERIC-SORT=1';
      </programlisting>
    </section><!-- sect2 -->

    <section id="rnfb25-intl-collations"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Character Sets and Collations</title>
      <section id="rnfb25-intl-collations01"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>UNICODE_CI_AI</title>
        <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-824">CORE-824</ulink>.</para>
<!-- Corrected v.2.5.1 -->
        <para>UNICODE_CI_AI: case-insensitive, accent-insensitive collation added for UTF8.</para>
<!-- End correction -->        
      </section><!-- sect3 -->
      <section id="rnfb25-intl-collations02"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>WIN_1258</title>
        <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2185">CORE-2185</ulink>.</para>
        <para>Added alias WIN_1258 for WIN1258 character set, for consistency with other WIN* character sets.</para>
      </section><!-- sect3 -->
      <section id="rnfb25-intl-collations03"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>SJIS and EUCJ Character Sets</title>
        <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2103">CORE-2103</ulink>.</para>
        <para>Strings in SJIS and EUCJ character sets are now verified for well-formedness.</para>
      </section><!-- sect3 -->
      <section id="rnfb25-intl-collations04"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Character set GB18030</title>
        <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2636">CORE-2636</ulink>.</para>
        <para>GB18030 is a Chinese national standard describing the required language and character 
        support necessary for software in China.  It has been activated from ICU.</para>
      </section><!-- sect3 -->
    </section><!-- sect2 -->

  </section><!-- sect1 -->

</chapter>