<chapter id="rnfb25-ports">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Platform Ports</title>
  </chapterinfo>
  <para>In this chapter are topics about ports of Firebird to non-mainstream
  platforms, along with notes about changes and improvements to ports that have
  been done previously.</para>

  <section id="ports25-zseries"><!-- sect1 -->
    <title>IBM eServer z-Series</title>

    <section id="ports25-zseries-s390">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Linux/s390 (32-bit)</title>
        <authorgroup>
          <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Ivanov</surname></author>
          <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
        </authorgroup>
      </sectioninfo>

      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2625">CORE-2625</ulink></para>
      <para>Port for Linux/s390 (32-bit) platform, built on s390x architecture.</para>
      <para>The patch for this port removes the -DS390X define from prefix.linux_s390x and replaces
      it with checks for __s390__ and __s390x__ defines which are presented by <emphasis>gcc</emphasis>.
      This way, both ports can use the one prefix file.</para>
      <note>
        <para>s390 has no alignment restrictions.</para>
      </note>
    </section>

    <section id="ports25-zseries-s390x">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Linux/s390x (64-bit)</title>
          <authorgroup>
            <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Horak</surname></author>
            <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
          </authorgroup>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2559">CORE-2559</ulink></para>
      <para>Port for Linux/s390x (64-bit) platform.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section id="ports25-sh4">
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Linux/sh4 (Renesas SH)</title>
      <authorgroup>
        <author><firstname>N.</firstname><surname>Iwamatsu</surname></author>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Ivanov</surname></author>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </authorgroup>
    </sectioninfo>

    <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2655">CORE-2655</ulink></para>
    <para>Port for Linux/sh4 (Renesas SH) platform</para>
    <para>Linux/sh4 (Renesas SH) architecture comes in little- and big-endian variants.  The port supports both.
    SH has alignment constraints.</para>
  </section>

  <section id="ports25-hpux"><!-- sect1 -->
    <title>HP-UX</title>

    <section id="ports25-hpux-01">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Lock Table Improvement for HP-UX</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>

      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2644">CORE-2644</ulink></para>

      <para>All of the POSIX platform ports except HP-UX enable the lock table to grow when the space initially
      allocated for it becomes exhausted.  For the HP-UX port, the hardware limitations of the PA-RISC platform
      prevented the same implementation of dynamic resizing because it does not support remapping the same file
      region to a different virtual address in the same process. <command>ISC_remap_file</command> therefore
      does not work and the lock table could not grow.</para>
      <para>The SAS team had developed a solution in their edition of the Vulcan code to make the lock table
      expansible on this platform.  It is this solution that has been imported to the Firebird 2.5 port
      for HP-UX.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section id="ports25-win32-old">
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Port for Very Old Windows 32-bit Platforms</title>
      <author><firstname>At the request of</firstname><surname>N. Samofatov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>

    <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2609">CORE-2609</ulink></para>
    <para>It had been signalled that versions of Firebird beyond V. 2.1.x would not support 
    Microsoft Windows 98, ME, or NT4. However, Red Soft, a commercial company which wants to support 
    Win98/ME and an idiomatic version of NT4 used by and maintained for government departments in Russia, 
    requested permission for the inclusion of some re-implemented compiler conditions, isolated in
    separate units, that would enable the building of <quote>ports</quote> of Firebird 2.5 to those old
    or idiomatic Windows platforms.</para>
    <important>
      <title>These ports are not part of the Firebird 2.5 main stream distribution!</title>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>The Windows binaries distributed by the Firebird Project do not contain this support.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>No such ports are subjected to any QA testing by the project.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Any QA, future maintenance and development or bug-fixing affecting such ports are 
          the responsibility of those who use them.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </important>

  </section>
</chapter>

