<chapter id="rnfb25-util">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>Command-line Utilities</title>
  </chapterinfo>

  <important>
    <title>Incompatibility with Older Clients</title>
    <para>To enable the 32-bit tools to work correctly with new structures that enable statistics
    routines to work properly with a 64-bit server, it was necessary to introduce some new internal
    API functions (<command>struct perf64</command> and <command>perf64_xxx</command>) and change
    <emphasis>isql</emphasis> and <emphasis>qli</emphasis> to use them. This means that the
    <emphasis>isql</emphasis> and <emphasis>qli</emphasis> programs in V.2.5 are not compatible with
    older Firebird clients.</para>
    <para>For more information, see the topic <link linkend="rnfb25-engine-stats64">Statistics Now
    Work Properly with 64-bit Values</link> in the Engine chapter.</para>
  </important>

  <section id="rfb25-util-tracemgr"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>fbtracemgr</title>
      <author>
        <firstname>Vlad</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname>
      </author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2524">CORE-2524</ulink>.</para>
    <para>This is a new CLI utility for interfacing with the <link linkend="rnfb25-trace">new trace facilities</link>.
    Usage is as follows.-</para>
    <literallayout class="monospaced">
  fbtracemgr &lt;action&gt; [&lt;parameters&gt;]
    </literallayout>

    <section id="rfb25-util-tracemgr01"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Action Switches</title>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
   -STA[RT]     Start trace session
   -STO[P]      Stop trace session
   -SU[SPEND]   Suspend trace session
   -R[ESUME]    Resume trace session
   -L[IST]      List existing trace sessions
      </literallayout>
    </section>

    <section id="rfb25-util-tracemgr02"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Parameters</title>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Action parameters</emphasis></para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
 -N[AME]     &lt;string&gt;  Session name
 -I[D]       &lt;number&gt;  Session ID
 -C[ONFIG]   &lt;string&gt;  Trace configuration file name
      </literallayout>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Connection parameters</emphasis></para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
 -SE[RVICE]  &lt;string&gt;  Service name
 -U[SER]     &lt;string&gt;  User name
 -P[ASSWORD] &lt;string&gt;  Password
 -FE[TCH]    &lt;string&gt;  Fetch password from file
 -T[RUSTED]  &lt;string&gt;  Force trusted authentication
      </literallayout>
    </section>

    <section id="rfb25-util-tracemgr03"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Examples using fbtracemgr</title>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
 fbtracemgr -SE remote_host:service_mgr -USER SYSDBA -PASS masterkey -LIST
 fbtracemgr -SE service_mgr -START -NAME my_trace -CONFIG my_cfg.txt
 fbtracemgr -SE service_mgr -SUSPEND -ID 2
 fbtracemgr -SE service_mgr -RESUME -ID 2
 fbtracemgr -SE service_mgr -STOP -ID 4
      </literallayout>
    </section>

    <note>
      <title>Notes</title>
      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>All switches and parameter identifiers are case-insensitive</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>To stop an interactive trace session on any platform, press Ctrl-C.</para>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>
    </note>
<!-- Added in v.2.5.1 -->
    <section id="rfb25-util-tracemgr04"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>V.2.5.1 Improvements</title>
      <para>The diagnostics of internal trace errors were improved. (Tracker 
      reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3413">CORE-3413</ulink>).</para>
      <para>Output is now flushed periodically. (Tracker 
      reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3324">CORE-3324</ulink>).</para>

    </section>

  </section>

  <section id="rfb25-util-password"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Retrieve Password from a File or Prompt</title>
      <author>
        <firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname>
      </author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Any command-line utility that takes a <command>-password</command>
    parameter is vulnerable to password sniffing, especially when the utility is
    run from a script.  Since v.2.1, the [PASSWORD] argument has displayed in
    the process list on POSIX platforms as an asterisk (&nbsp;*&nbsp;), which
    was an improvement on showing it in clear.</para>
    <para>As a second stage towards hiding the password from unauthorised eyes, this
    release enables it to be retrieved from a file or (on POSIX) from STDIN.</para>

    <section id="rfb25-util-password-swfetch"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>New -fetch_password Switch</title>
      <para>Firebird 2.5 introduces the new switch <firstterm>-fet[ch_password]</firstterm>
      as an optional replacement for <firstterm>-pa[ssword]</firstterm>
      for all command-line utilities that take a password for authentication purposes.  The
      switch may be progressively abbreviated from the right, conforming to the established
      rules.</para>
      <important>
        <title>PLEASE NOTE</title>
        <orderedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>The exception to the rules is the <emphasis>qli</emphasis> utility,
            for which only <firstterm>-F</firstterm> is valid.</para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para>The new switch <emphasis>cannot</emphasis> be applied to substitute
            for the <firstterm>-pw</firstterm> switch of the <emphasis>gsec</emphasis>
            utility.</para>
          </listitem>
        </orderedlist>
      </important>
      <section id="rfb25-util-password-swusage"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Usage of -fetch_password</title>
        <para>The switch requires one parameter, an unquoted string that is the file path for
        the file containing the password.  If the call is not made by a system user with
        Superuser/Administrator privileges, the location must be accessible by the system
        user making the call.</para>

        <para>For example, </para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  isql -user sysdba -fet passfile server:employee
        </literallayout>
        <para>extracts the first line of from a file named <quote>passfile</quote> in the current
        working directory and loads it into the [PASSWORD] argument of the call.</para>

        <para>The filename can be specified as <emphasis>stdin</emphasis>:</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  isql -user sysdba -fet stdin server:employee
        </literallayout>
        <para>If stdin is the terminal, a prompt is presented&mdash;</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  Enter password:
        </literallayout>
        <para>&mdash;requiring the operator to type in the password.</para>

        <tip>
          <para>On POSIX, the operator will also be prompted if s/he specifies</para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
    -fetch /dev/tty
          </literallayout>
          <para>This technique could be useful if, for example, you needed to restore
          from <firstterm>stdin</firstterm> (all one line):</para>
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
  bunzip2 -c emp.fbk.bz2 | gbak -c stdin /db/new.fdb
     -user sysdba -fetch /dev/tty
          </literallayout>
        </tip>
      </section><!-- sect3 -->
    </section><!-- sect2 -->
  </section><!-- sect1 -->

  <section id="rnfb25-util-gsec"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>gsec</title>
    <para>The following improvements have been added for <emphasis>gsec</emphasis>:</para>
    <section id="rnfb25-util-gsec01"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Mapping Switch for Windows Administrators</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Alex</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Since v.2.1, Windows domain administrators have had full access to the user
      management functions.  In v.2.5 they do not get these privileges automatically unless
      the SYSDBA has configured the security database to make it happen automatically.</para>

      <para>In the <emphasis>Administrative Features</emphasis> chapter is a
      <link linkend="rnfb25-prvlgs">detailed overview</link> of the new system role RDB$ADMIN.
      There, you will find descriptions of the new ALTER ROLE syntax that can be used by the
      SYSDBA to enable or disable the automatic mapping of Windows administrators to the
      RDB$ADMIN role in databases, including the security database which they access when
      creating, altering and dropping users.</para>

      <para>This automatic mapping can also be done in a <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> command-line
      call, using the new <command>-mapping</command> switch.</para>

      <section id="rnfb25-util-gsec-mappingswitch"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Mapping an OS Administrator to the RDB$ADMIN Role</title>
        <para>The new <command>-mapping</command> switch is used to enable or disable the
        association of an operating system user with the RDB$ADMIN role in the security database.
        It takes one argument: either <emphasis>set</emphasis> to enable the association or
        <emphasis>drop</emphasis> to disable it. The syntax is:</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  -mapping {set | drop}
        </literallayout>
      </section>

      <section id="rnfb25-util-gsec-adminrole"><!-- Level 3 section -->
        <title>Granting the RDB$ADMIN Role to a Firebird User</title>

        <para>The introduction of the RDB$ADMIN system role has made it possible to escalate
        the privileges of an ordinary user. However, it was (and still is) not possible any for
        any user, even SYSDBA, to attach directly to the security database and grant the
        required permissions for the user to manage other users. A parameter&mdash;GRANT ADMIN
        ROLE&mdash;was included in the new CREATE USER and ALTER USER statement syntaxes to enable SYSDBA, or another
        user that has already acquired the RDB$ADMIN role in the security database, to have
        the RDB$ADMIN role applied to an ordinary user <quote>at arm's length</quote>, as it
        were.</para>

        <para>The same can be achieved in <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> using the new switch
        <command>-admin</command>.  It takes one argument:  either YES (to grant the RDB$ADMIN
        role to the specified user in <emphasis>security2.fdb</emphasis>) or NO (to revoke it).
        The syntax is:</para>
        <literallayout class="monospaced">
  -admin {YES | NO}
        </literallayout>
      </section>
    </section><!-- sect2 -->

    <section id="rnfb25-util-gsec02"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Command-line Help for gsec</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference: <ulink
      url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-756">CORE-756</ulink>)</para>
      <para>Parameter help has been implemented for <emphasis>gsec</emphasis>, accessible by 
      using the <command>-help</command> or <command>-?</command> switches. </para>
    </section>
  </section>
  
  <section id="rnfb25-util-fbsvcmgr"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>fbsvcmgr</title>
    <para>Additions made to <emphasis>gsec</emphasis> and the Service Parameter Block (SPB)
    relating to the system role RDB$ADMIN are covered by the appropriate support in
    the <emphasis>fbsvcmgr</emphasis> utility.</para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>for <command>gsec -mapping</command>, two new tag items:  <command>isc_action_svc_set_mapping</command> and
        <command>isc_action_svc_drop_mapping</command></para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>for <command>gsec -admin</command>:  the new parameter <command>isc_spb_sec_admin</command>, of
        <emphasis>spb_long</emphasis> with either 0 as its value (meaning REVOKE ADMIN ROLE) or
        non-zero (meaning GRANT ADMIN ROLE).</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    <para>For a full overview of the RDB$ADMIN role, refer to the
    topic <link linkend="rnfb25-prvlgs">New RDB$ADMIN System Role</link> in the
    <emphasis>Administrative Features</emphasis> chapter.</para>
  </section><!-- sect1 -->


  <section id="rnfb25-util-gbak"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>gbak</title>

    <section id="rnfb25-util-gbakstats">
      <title>Run-time Statistics in Verbose Output</title>
      <author><firstname>Vlad</firstname><surname>Khorsun</surname></author>
      <para><emphasis>gbak</emphasis> can now show some runtime statistics in its verbose
      output. A new command-line switch <function>-STATISTICS</function> has been added
      to specify which statistics items should be produced.  Currently, four items are
      implemented:

        <table id="rnfb25-util-tbl-gbakstats" >
        <?dbfo keep-together='auto'?>
          <title>Arguments for <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> STATISTICS Output</title>
          <tgroup cols="3" colsep="0" rowsep="1">
            <colspec colname="c1" colwidth="2*"/>
            <colspec colname="c2" colwidth="*"/>
            <colspec colname="c3" colwidth="3*"/>
            <thead>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Item</entry>
                <entry align="center">Argument</entry>
                <entry align="left">Data Reported</entry>
              </row>
            </thead>
            <tbody>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Total time</entry>
                <entry align="center">T</entry>
                <entry align="left">Time elapsed since the <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> process
                started, in seconds and milliseconds</entry>
              </row>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Time delta</entry>
                <entry align="center">D</entry>
                <entry align="left">Time elapsed since the previous line of output, in seconds and milliseconds</entry>
              </row>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Page reads</entry>
                <entry align="center">R</entry>
                <entry align="left">Number of page reads since the previous line of output, integer</entry>
              </row>
              <row>
                <entry align="left">Page writes</entry>
                <entry align="center">W</entry>
                <entry align="left">Number of page writes since the previous line of output, integer</entry>
              </row>
            </tbody>
          </tgroup>
        </table>
      </para>
      <para>At least one item is mandatory for the STATISTICS switch.  The arguments are
      case-insensitive and they can be in any order.  For example, <quote>TDRW</quote>
      and <quote>WdrT</quote> are equivalent.</para>
      <para>The STATISTICS switch will have no effect if the <function>-v[er]</function> switch
      is not specified.</para>

      <para>Verbose output with STATISTICS includes two special lines:
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>a line with headers for the specified statistics, printed before the other
          statistics lines:
            <literallayout class="monospaced">
gbak: time delta reads writes
            </literallayout>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>a line with total statistics summaries for the specified items, printed
          after the end of the main process:
            <literallayout class="monospaced">
gbak: 46.684 0.002 171 82442 total statistics
            </literallayout>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </para>

      <note>
        <para>The feature is fully supported in the Services API with
        <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-spb-gbakstats">a new item in the SPB</link> (Services Parameter Block).
        The <emphasis>fbsvcmgr</emphasis> utility also supports the SPB implementation.</para>
      </note>
      <bridgehead renderas="sect4">Examples</bridgehead>
      <orderedlist type="alpha">
        <listitem>Show total time since <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> start:
          <programlisting>
gbak -v -STATISTICS T -b employee emp_bkp.fbk -y log21.log
          </programlisting>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>Show delta time and page reads:
          <programlisting>
... -STAT DR ...
          </programlisting>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>Show all statistics items:
          <programlisting>
... -sta TDRW ...
          </programlisting>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>Sample of <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> verbose output:
          <literallayout class="monospaced">
firebird>gbak -v -stat tdrw -r a.fbk a.fdb
gbak:opened file a.fbk
gbak: time delta reads writes
gbak: 0.173 0.173 0 0 transportable backup -- data in XDR format
gbak: 0.175 0.002 0 0 backup file is compressed
gbak: 0.177 0.001 0 0 backup version is 10
gbak: 0.270 0.092 0 650 created database a.fdb, page_size 8192 bytes
gbak: 0.273 0.002 0 2 started transaction
...
gbak: 18.661 0.002 0 0 restoring data for table TEST1
gbak: 18.698 0.036 0 0 10000 records restored
...
gbak: 25.177 0.036 0 0 1770000 records restored
gbak: 25.220 0.042 0 1633 1780000 records restored
...
gbak: 38.702 0.002 0 0 restoring privilege for user SYSDBA
gbak: 38.707 0.004 22 0 creating indexes
gbak: 45.015 6.308 82 38394 activating and creating deferred index T2_VAL
...
gbak: 46.682 0.008 4 13 finishing, closing, and going home
gbak: 46.684 0.002 171 82442 total statistics
gbak:adjusting the ONLINE and FORCED WRITES flags
          </literallayout>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>
      <formalpara><title>See also</title>
        <para>Tracker ticket <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1999">CORE-1999</ulink></para>
      </formalpara>
    </section> <!-- gbak run-time statistics -->

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-gbak-fix01"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Repair Switches for Malformed Strings</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Adriano</firstname>
          <surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1831">CORE-1831</ulink>.</para>
      <para>The <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> utility has two new restore switches intended to repair malformed UNICODE_FSS
      character data and metadata, respectively, when restoring the backup of an affected database.</para>

      <para><emphasis role="bold">Switch Syntax</emphasis></para>
      <programlisting>
  -FIX_FSS_D(ATA) &lt;charset&gt; -- fix malformed UNICODE_FSS data
  -FIX_FSS_M(ETADATA) &lt;charset&gt; -- fix malformed UNICODE_FSS metadata
      </programlisting>
      
      <tip>
        <title>Hints with Malformed String Exceptions for Restores</title>
        <para><emphasis>(<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2754">CORE-2754</ulink>,
        A. dos Santos Fernandes)</emphasis></para>
        <para>When a restore fails with malformed string errors, <emphasis>gbak</emphasis> will supply a
        hint in verbose output, referring the user to the  <command>-FIX_FSS_METADATA</command> and
        <command>-FIX_FSS_DATA</command> switches.</para>
      </tip>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-gbak-fix02"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <author><firstname>Adriano</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
        <title>Preserve Character Set Default Collation</title>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>An improvement allows the current value of RDB$DEFAULT_COLLATE_NAME in the system
      table RDB$CHARACTER_SETS to survive the backup/restore cycle.</para>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-789">CORE-789</ulink>.</para>
    </section>
    
    <section id="rnfb25-utils-gbak-fix03"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <author><firstname>Adriano</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
        <title>Improve Insertion Performance for Restore</title>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">(v.2.5.1)</emphasis> Improved performance in the records insertion 
      phase of <emphasis>restore</emphasis>.</para>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-3433">CORE-3433</ulink>.</para>
    </section>
    
  </section>

  <!-- Modified in v.2.5.1, translators, please note -->

  <section id="rnfb25-utils-nbackup"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>nBackup</title>
    <section id="rnfb25-utils-nbackup01"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>New Switches Added</title>
      <para>Four switches were added to NBackup:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  -FE &lt;filename&gt;   Fetch password from file
  -Z               Print version information
  -?               Help
  -D ON|OFF        Force direct I/O on or off
  
      </literallayout>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>-FE :: Supports the feature allowing the authentication password to be 
          fetched from a file.  For details, see <link linkend="rfb25-util-password-swfetch">New -fetch_password 
          Switch</link> in this chapter.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>-Z :: Prints the version details of the <emphasis>nbackup</emphasis> executable.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>-? :: Prints a terse list of usage instructions for the switches and options.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>-D :: ON option enables direct input and output operations; OFF disables them. The 
          default settings depend on the operating system and Firebird version, as follows:</para>
          <variablelist>
            <varlistentry>
              <term>Windows service-capable platforms</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>ON in all versions.</para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
            <varlistentry>
              <term>POSIX</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>OFF in 2.0-2.0.5, 2.1-2.1.2, 2.1.4, 2.5 and higher</para>
                <para>ON in 2.1.3 and 2.0.6, provided O_DIRECT is available; otherwise
                OFF. POSIX_FADV_NOREUSE is also set, if available.</para>
                <note>
                  <para>Using -D ON has no effect if neither O_DIRECT nor POSIX_FADV_NOREUSE is available,
                  although no error or warning will be raised.</para>
                </note>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
          </variablelist>
          <note>
            <para>Support for the new -D switch is also included among changes to the Services API
            in this version.  For details, 
            see <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-spbnbackup03">isc_spb_nbk_direct on|off</link> in 
            the chapter <emphasis>Changes to the Firebird API and ODS</emphasis>.</para>
          </note>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-nbackup02"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>I/O Resource Load Reduced on POSIX</title>
      <para>An improvement has been done for POSIX versions to address a problem whereby
      the full backup tool of the <emphasis>nBackup</emphasis> incremental backup utility
      would hog I/O resources when backing up large databases, bringing production work
      to a standstill.  Now, nBackup tries to read from the operating system cache before
      attempting to read from disk, thus reducing the I/O load substantially.</para>
      <note>
        <para>The <quote>cost</quote> may be a 10 to 15 percent increase in the time taken
        to complete the full backup under high-load conditions.</para>
      </note>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2316">CORE-2316</ulink>.</para>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-utils-isql"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>isql</title>
    <para>Some changes to the <emphasis>isql</emphasis> interactive query tool have been
    implemented.</para>

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-isql01"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>SQLSTATE instead of SQLCODE</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para><emphasis>isql</emphasis> now returns the SQLSTATE completion code in diagnostics, instead of
      the now deprecated SQLCODE.  For more information, see the topic
      <link linkend="rnfb25-apiods-api-sqlstate">Support for SQLSTATE Completion Codes</link> in the
      chapter <emphasis>Changes to the Firebird API and ODS</emphasis>.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-isql02"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Improvement for Exponential Number Output</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Claudio</firstname><surname>Valderrama</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1171">CORE-1171</ulink>.</para>
      <para><emphasis>isql</emphasis> has always output different formatting of numbers on Windows
      and POSIX for two-digit exponents. The default behaviour of Microsoft and Intel compilers is to
      zero-pad the exponent to three digits regardless.  For example, </para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  select cast ('-2.488355210669293e+39' as double precision)
    from rdb$database;
      </literallayout>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>On POSIX, the result is<command> -2.488355210669293e+39 </command></para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>On Windows, the result was<command> -2.488355210669293e+039 </command></para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
      <para>The <emphasis>isql</emphasis> output has been modified so that the Windows output
      now conforms with that on other platforms.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-isql03"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>SHOW COLLATIONS in isql Help</title>
      <para>Help for SHOW COLLATIONS has been added to the command-line help
      for <emphasis>isql</emphasis>.  (Tracker reference
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2432">CORE-2432</ulink>,
      A. dos Santos Fernandes).</para>
    </section>
    
<!-- Undocumented addition, inserted at v.2.5.1 -->
    <section id="rnfb25-utils-isql04"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>SET ROWCOUNT Statement Added</title>
        <author>
          <firstname>Mark</firstname><surname>O'Donohue</surname>
        </author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Added mainly to assist testers, this command enables a limit to be set on the number of 
      rows a query returns to the interactive <emphasis>isql</emphasis> shell.</para>
      <para><emphasis role="bold">Example of Use</emphasis></para>
      <para>The following isql statement will stop returning rows after the 
      10,000th row has been output:</para>
      <literallayout class="monospaced">
  SQL>set rowcount 10000;
      </literallayout>
    </section>
<!-- End undocumented addition -->
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-utils-gpre"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>gpre (Precompiler)</title>

    <section id="rnfb25-utils-gpre01"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>Some Updates</title>
        <authorgroup>
          <author><firstname>Stephen</firstname><surname>Boyd</surname></author>
          <author><firstname>Adriano</firstname><surname>dos Santos Fernandes</surname></author>
        </authorgroup>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1527">CORE-1527</ulink>.</para>
      <para>GPRE now supports the IS NOT DISTINCT predicate and CASE/NULLIF/COALESCE/SUBSTRING functions,
        as well as the whole set of CURRENT_* context variables.</para>
    </section>
    <important>
      <title>Deprecated Features with Future Impact on Utilities</title>
      <para>In anticipation of the dropping of the intrinsic function <command>isc_ddl</command>
      from the Firebird 3 codebase, certain features currently available in the
      <emphasis>gdef</emphasis> and <emphasis>gpre</emphasis>
      tools are deprecated&mdash;meaning that, whilst they may work in V.2.5, they will fail
      in Firebird 3.  More details can be found in the
      <link linkend="fb25-deprecation-warning">Compatibility chapter</link>.</para>
    </important>
  </section>

  <section id="rnfb25-utils-gstat"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>gstat</title>
      <author>
        <firstname>Claudio</firstname>
        <surname>Valderrama</surname>
      </author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Tracker reference <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1411">CORE-1411</ulink>.</para>
    <para>The <emphasis>gstat</emphasis> statistics reporting utility now has <command>-?</command> and
    <command>-help</command> switches for requesting help about available switches and arguments.</para>
  </section>

</chapter>