  <chapter id="rnfbtwo-fbconf">
  <chapterinfo>
    <title>New Configuration Parameters and Changes</title>
  </chapterinfo>

    <section id="fbconf-externalfileaccess"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>ExternalFileAccess</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Modified in Firebird 2, to allow the first path cited in ExternalFilesAccess to be used as the default
    when a new external file is created.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="fbconf-legacyhash"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>LegacyHash</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>This parameter enables you to configure Firebird 2 to reject an old DES hash always in an upgraded 
    security database. If you don't use the security database upgrade procedure, this parameter does not affect 
    Firebird operation. A DES hash cannot arrive in the new security2.fdb.</para>
    <para>Refer to the <xref linkend="sec-new-db-upgrade"/> Security section for instructions on upgrading your 
    existing Firebird 1.5 security.fdb (or a renamed isc4.gdb) to the new security database layout.</para>
    <para>The default value is 1 (true).</para>
    </section>
    
    <section id="fbconf-redirection" xreflabel="Redirection"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>Redirection</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Parameter for controlling redirection of remote requests.  It controls the multi-hop capability that was
    broken in InterBase 6 and is restored in Firebird 2.</para>
      <section id="fbconf-redirection-multihop">
      <title>About Multi-hop</title>
      <para>When you attach to some database using multiple hosts in the connection string, only the last host in
      this list is the one that opens the database.  The other hosts act as intermediate gateways on port gds_db.
      Previously, when working, this feature was available unconditionally. Now, it can be configured.</para>
      <para>Remote redirection is turned <emphasis>off</emphasis> by default.</para>
      <caution>
        <para>If you are considering enabling multi-hop capability, please study
        the <xref linkend="sec-summary-vulner"/> text in the chapter on Security and in the documentation for this
        parameter in the firebird.conf file.</para>
      </caution>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="fbconf-gcpolicy"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>GCPolicy</title>
      <author><firstname>V.</firstname><surname>Horsun</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Garbage collection policy.  It is now possible to choose the policy for garbage collection on SuperServer.
    The possible settings are cooperative, background and combined, as explained in the notes for
    <function>GPolicy</function> in <function>firebird.conf</function>.</para>

    <para>Not applicable to Classic, which supports only cooperative garbage collection.  More detail to come.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="fbconf-oldolumnnaming"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>New parameter OldColumnNaming</title>
      <author><firstname>P.</firstname><surname>Reeves</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>The parameter OldColumnNaming has been ported forward from Firebird 1.5.3.  This parameter allows users to
    revert to pre-V1.5 column naming behaviour in SELECT expressions.  The installation default is 0 (disabled).  If
    it is enabled, the engine will not attempt to supply run-time identifiers, e.g. CONCATENATION for derived fields
    where the developer has neglected to provide identifiers.</para>
    <important>
      <para>This setting affects all databases on the server and will potentially produce exceptions or
      unpredicted results where mixed applications are implemented.</para>
    </important>
    </section>

    <section id="fbconf-usepriorityscheduler"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>UsePriorityScheduler</title>
      <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>Setting this parameter to zero now disables switching of thread priorities completely.  It affects only
    the Win32 SuperServer.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="fbconf-tcpnonagle"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <sectioninfo>
      <title>TCPNoNagle has changed</title>
      <author><firstname>K.</firstname><surname>Kuznetzov</surname></author>
    </sectioninfo>
    <para>The default value for TcpNoNagle is now TCP_NODELAY.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="fbconf-removed"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Removed or Deprecated Parameters</title>
      <section id="fbconf-removed-crtintwindow">
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>CreateInternalWindow</title>
        <author><firstname>D.</firstname><surname>Yemanov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The option CreateInternalWindow is no longer required to run multiple server instances
        and it has been removed.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="fbconf-deadthreadscollection"><!-- Level 1 section -->
      <sectioninfo>
        <title>DeadThreadsCollection is no longer used</title>
        <author><firstname>A.</firstname><surname>Peshkov</surname></author>
      </sectioninfo>
      <para>The DeadThreadsCollection parameter is no longer used at all.  Dead threads are now efficiently
      released &quot;on the fly&quot;, making configuration unnecessary. Firebird 2.0 silently ignores
      this parameter.</para>
      </section>
    </section>
  </chapter>