  <chapter id="rnfbtwo-general-notes">
    <chapterinfo>
      <title>General Notes</title>
    </chapterinfo>
    <!-- Slight changes in v.2.0.4 -->
    <para>The v.2.0 release cycle of Firebird brought a large collection of long-awaited enhancements under the
    hood that significantly improved performance, security and support for international languages.  Several annoying
    limitations, along with a huge pile of old bugs inherited from the legacy code, have gone.  Many of the
    command-line tools have been refurbished and this release introduces the all-new incremental backup tools NBak and
    NBackup.</para>

    <para>The old <quote>252 bytes or less</quote> limit on index size is gone for good, replaced by much-extended
    limits that depend on page size.  Calculation of index statistics has been revamped to improve the choices the
    optimizer has available, especially for complex outer join distributions and DISTINCT queries.</para>

    <para>Many new additions have been made to the SQL language, including support for derived tables (SELECT ... FROM (
    SELECT ... FROM), PSQL blocks in dynamic SQL through the new EXECUTE BLOCK syntax and some handy new extensions
    in PSQL itself.</para>
    
    <section id="general-notes-206"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 206 -->
      <title>Sub-release 2.0.6</title>
      <para>This sub-release does not add any new functionality to the database engine.  Several <link linkend="bug-206-bugsfixed">important bug-fixes</link> that have turned up during development of versions 2.1.x and 2.5 have been backported.</para>
      <para>Of special note are the fixes for the <emphasis>gfix</emphasis> validation and shutdown issues
      described below in the <link linkend="general-notes-205-gfix">Known Issues for V.2.0.5</link>.  The Tracker 
      ticket numbers are
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2271">CORE-2271</ulink> and 
      <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2846">CORE-2846</ulink>, respectively.</para>
      <para>Note also few backported improvements that are present in this release:</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>The <emphasis>firebird.conf</emphasis> <link linkend="fbconf-conntimeout">ConnectionTimeout</link> 
          can now be applied to XNET connections, to help with a specific slow connection problem on some 
          Windows installations.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>A backported <link linkend="dml-dsql-cross-join-imprv">optimizer improvement</link> could help to 
          speed up some complicated queries involving cross joins.</para>
        </listitem>
        
        <listitem>
          <para>A backported <link linkend="util-backup-nbak-nbackup-improve">nBackup improvement for POSIX platforms</link> could help alleviate a reported problem of resource-gobbling during full backup.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </section>
    <section id="general-notes-205"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 205 -->
      <title>Sub-release 2.0.5</title>
      <para>This sub-release does not add any new functionality to the database engine.  Several <link linkend="bug-205-bugsfixed">important bug-fixes</link> that have turned up during development of versions 2.1.x and 2.5 have been backported.</para>
      <section id="general-notes-205-dpb"><!-- Level 2 section, inserted in 205 -->
        <title>Important Change to API DPB Parameters</title>
        <para>A long-standing, legacy loophole in the handling of DPB parameters enabled ordinary users to make connection settings that could lead to database corruptions or give them access to SYSDBA-only operations.  The loophole has been closed, a change that could affect several existing applications, database tools and connectivity layers (drivers, components).  Details are in Chapter 3, <link linkend="apiods-api-dpb205">Changes to the Firebird API and ODS</link>.</para>
      </section>
      
      <section id="general-notes-205-gfix"><!-- Level 2 section, inserted in 205 -->
        <title>Recently Discovered Issues with gfix</title>
        <orderedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para>It has been discovered that the <emphasis>gfix</emphasis> utility has a legacy 
            bug <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2271">(CORE-2271)</ulink> that exhibits
            itself during the database validation/repair routines on large databases.  The bug has been fixed 
            in version 2.1.2 and affects all preceding versions of Firebird, <emphasis role="bold">including 
            this sub-release</emphasis>.  The privilege level of the user running these routines is checked too 
            late in the operation, thus allowing a non-privileged user (i.e., not SYSDBA or Owner) to start a 
            validation operation.  Once the privilege check occurs, the database validation can be halted in 
            mid-operation and thus be left unfinished, resulting in logical corruption that might not have been 
            there otherwise.</para>
            
            <para>It appears likely that this trouble occurs only with quite large databases:  on small ones, 
            the changes performed may complete before the privilege check.</para>

            <important>
              <title>This is not a Feature!</title>
              <para>Documentation has always stipulated that the SYSDBA or Owner must perform operations that
              do database-level changes.  The <emphasis>gfix</emphasis> code was always meant to enforce this
              rule.  If you have discovered this loophole yourself and have regarded it as <quote>an undocumented
              feature</quote> that allowed ordinary users to do validation and repair, then you are on notice.
              It is a bug and has been corrected in versions 2.1.2 and 2.5.  It will be corrected in versions
              2.0.6 and 1.5.6.</para>
            </important>
          </listitem>
          
          <listitem>
            <para>A regression issue surfaced with the implementation of the new <emphasis>gfix shutdown</emphasis>
            modes when shutdown is called with the -attach or -tran options.  If connections are still 
            alive when the specified timeout expires, the engine returns a message indicating that the 
            shutdown was unsuccessful.  However, instead of leaving the database in the <emphasis>online</emphasis> 
            state, as it should, it puts the database into some uncertain <quote>off-line</quote> state and further
            connections are refused.</para>
            <para>It affects all versions of Firebird up to and including v.2.0.5 and v.2.1.3, and all v.2.5 alphas,
            betas and release candidates.  See Tracker ticket
            <ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-2846">CORE-2846</ulink>.</para>
          </listitem>
        </orderedlist>
      </section>

    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-204"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 204 -->
      <title>Sub-release 2.0.4</title>
      <para>This sub-release does not add any new functionality to the database engine.  Several important bugs have 
      been fixed, including a number of <link linkend="nbackupbugs">unregistered nbackup bugs</link> that were found
      to cause database corruptions under high-load conditions.</para>
      
      <para>During Firebird 2.1 development it was discovered that Forced Writes had never worked on Linux, in either
      the InterBase or the Firebird era.  That was fixed in V.2.1 and backported to this sub-release.</para>

      <para>The issue with events over WNet protocol reported below for v.2.0.3 has been fixed.  The full 
      list of <link linkend="bug-204-bugsfixed">bugs fixed in V.2.0.4</link> is in the
      bugfixes chapter and also in the separate bug fixes document associated with V.2.1, which you can download from 
      the Documentation Index at the Firebird website.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-203"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 203 -->
      <title>Sub-release 2.0.3</title>
      <para>This sub-release does not add any new functionality to the database engine 
      but fixes two significant bugs, one of which caused the v.2.0.2
      sub-release to be recalled a week after it was released.</para>
      <para>To all intents and purposes, therefore, this is the sub-release following
      sub-release 2.0.1.  However, in the interim, the port of Firebird 2.0.3 to Solaris 
      2.10 (Solaris 10) has been completed for both Intel and SPARC platforms.</para>
      <warning>
        <para>Please be sure to uninstall Firebird 2.0.2.  It should not be necessary to 
        revert databases to pre-2.0.2 state but, if you used EXECUTE STATEMENT to
        operate on varchars, varchar data written from results might have suffered 
        truncation.</para>
      </warning>
        <section id="general-notes-203-issues"><!-- Level 2 section, inserted in 203 -->
          <title>Known Issues</title>
          <para>A regression appeared after v.2.0.1, whereby events cannot work across the WNet protocol.  
          A call to isc_que_events() will cause the server to crash.  
          (<ulink url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org/browse/CORE-1460">Tracker ID CORE-1460</ulink>).</para>
        </section>
    </section>
    <section id="general-notes-202"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 202 -->
      <title>Sub-release 2.0.2</title>
      <para>This sub-release does not add any new functionality to the database engine.
      It contains a number of fixes to bugs discovered since the v.2.0.1 sub-release.</para>
      <para>Some minor improvements were made:</para>
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>A port of Firebird 2.0.2 Classic for MacOSX on Intel was completed by Paul
          Beach and released.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>In response to a situation reported in the Tracker as CORE-1148, whereby
          the Services API gave ordinary users access to the firebird.log, Alex Peshkoff
          made the log accessible only if the logged-in user is SYSDBA.</para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-201"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 201 -->
    <title>Sub-release 2.0.1</title>
    <para>This sub-release does not add any new functionality to the database engine.
    It contains a number of fixes to bugs discovered since the release.</para>
    <para>Minor improvements:</para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Gentoo or FreeBSD are now detected during configuration
        (Ref.: Tracker CORE-1047).  Contributions by Alex Peshkoff and D. Petten.</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>It was discovered that the background garbage collector was unnecessarily reading back
        versions of active records (Ref.: Tracker CORE-1071). That was removed by Vlad
        Horsun.</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>Since Firebird 1.5.3, neither the relation name nor the alias was being returned for
        columns participating in a GROUP BY aggregation with joins.  It has been fixed, particularly to assist the
        IB Object data access layer to properly support its column search features on output sets.</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

      <section id="general-notes-201-sessions"><!-- Level 2 section, inserted in 201 -->
        <title>Windows Vista and XP/Server2003 Users</title>
        <para>Bugfix (CORE-1133) &quot;The XNET (IPC) communication protocol would not work across session
        boundaries&quot; affects those attempting to access databases using the local protocol on Windows
        Vista as well as those using remote terminal services locally on XP or Server 2003. This fix,
         done in v.2.0.1, should remove the problems encountered under these conditions.</para>
      </section>
      <section id="general-notes-201-imprtnt"><!-- Level 2 section, inserted in 201 -->
        <title>Important Reversion</title>
        <para>An important reversion to 1.5 behaviour has occurred in sub-release 2.0.1, as follows:</para>
        <para>In Firebird 2.0, a deliberate restriction was imposed to prevent anyone from dropping,
        altering or recreating a PSQL module if it had been used since the database was opened.  An attempt
        to prepare the DDL statement would result in an <quote>Object in Use</quote> exception.</para>

        <para>Many people complained that the restriction was unacceptable because they depended on
        performing these metadata changes <quote>on the fly</quote>.  The restriction has therefore been
        removed.  However, the reversion in no way implies that performing DDL on active PSQL modules is
        <quote>safer</quote> in Firebird 2.0.1 and higher than it was in V.1.5.</para>
      </section>
    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-readon"><!-- Level 1 section, inserted in 201 -->
    <title>Before You Proceed</title>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>If you are upgrading from V.2.0 or V.2.0.1 to V.2.0.2, please study the
        sections summarising the latest <xref linkend="bug-202-bugsfixed"/>.</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <!-- Following para is changed in 201 -->
        <para>If you are moving to Firebird 2.0.2 directly from Firebird 1.5.4 or lower versions, please
    take a moment to read on here and note some points about approaching this new release.</para>
      </listitem>
     </itemizedlist>
    </section>
    <!-- End of changes in 201 -->
    <section id="general-notes-one"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Back Up!</title>
    <para>The on-disk structure (ODS) of the databases created under Firebird has changed.  Although Firebird 2.0
    will connect to databases having older ODS versions, most of the new features will not be available to
    them.</para>

    <para>Make transportable gbak backups of your existing databases--including your old security.fdb or (even
    older) isc4.gdb security databases--<emphasis>before</emphasis> you uninstall the older Firebird server and
    set out to install Firebird 2.0.  Before you proceed, restore these backups in a temporary location, using
    the old gbak, and verify that the backups are good.</para>
    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-two">
    <!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Compatibility Issues</title>

    <para>Naturally, with so much bug-removal and closing of holes, there are sure to be things that worked before
    and now no longer work.  A collection of <xref linkend="rnfbtwo-compat"/> is provided to assist
    you to work out what needs to be done in your existing system to make it compatible with Firebird 2.0.</para>
    <para>Give special attention to the changes required in the area of user authentication.</para>
    </section>
    
    <section id="general-notes-three"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Incomplete Implementations</title>
    <para>In a couple of areas, planned implementations could not be completed for the v.2.0 release and will be 
    deferred to later sub-releases:</para>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>64-bit Support</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>64-bit builds for both Superserver and Classic are ready and available for installing 
          on Linux. Note that the 64-bit ports have been done and tested for AMD64 only. These builds
          should also work on Intel EM64T. The Intel IA-64 platform is not supported in this
          release.  A FreeBSD port of the 64-bit builds has also been done.</para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
          <para>Win64 hosts are running without problems and the MS VC8 final release seems to work
          satisfactorily, so we are able to say we are no longer hampered by problems with the
          Microsoft compiler.  The Win64 port is complete and into testing, but is still considered
          experimental.  It will become publicly available in a subsequent v.2.x release.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Installer Support for Multiple Server Installations</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Although the capability to run multiple Firebird servers simultaneously on a single host has been
          present since Firebird 1.5, we still do not provide the ability to set them up through our installer
          programs and scripts.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Support for Databases on Raw Devices</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>During Firebird 2 development, a capability to create and access databases on raw
        devices on POSIX systems was enabled to assist an obscure platform port.  To date it is
        undocumented, has not been subjected to rigorous QA or field testing and is known to present 
        problems for calculating disk usage statistics.  A Readme text will be
        made available in the CVS tree for those who wish to give it a try and would like to make a
        case for its becoming a feature in a future release.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-four">
      <!-- Level 1 section -->

    <title>Bug Reporting and Support</title>

    <para>If you think you have discovered a bug in this release, please make a
    point of reading the instructions for bug reporting in the article
    <ulink
      url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=devel&amp;sub=qa&amp;id=bugreport_howto">How
    to Report Bugs Effectively</ulink>, at the Firebird Project website.</para>

      <para>Follow these guidelines as you attempt to analyse your bug:</para>

      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Write detailed bug reports, supplying the exact server model
          and build number of your Firebird kit. Also provide details of the
          OS platform. Include reproducible test data in your report and post
          it to our <ulink
          url="http://tracker.firebirdsql.org">Tracker</ulink>.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>If you want to start a discussion thread about a bug or an
          implementation, do so by subscribing to the <ulink
          url="mailto:firebird-devel-request@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe">firebird-devel
          list</ulink> and posting the best possible bug description you can.</para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Firebird-devel is not for discussing bugs in <emphasis>your</emphasis> software! If you 
          are a novice with Firebird and need help with any issue, you can subscribe to
          the <ulink url="http://www.yahoogroups.com/community/firebird-support">firebird-support 
          list</ulink> and email your questions to <emphasis>firebird-support@yahoogroups.
          com</emphasis>.</para>
          <tip>
            <para>You can subscribe to this and numerous other Firebird-related support forums from
            the <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=lists">Lists and Newsgroups 
            page</ulink> at the Firebird website.</para>
          </tip>
        </listitem>

      </orderedlist>

    </section>

    <section id="general-notes-five"><!-- Level 1 section -->
    <title>Documentation</title>
    <para>A full, integrated manual for Firebird 2.0 and preceding releases is well on the way, but it's
    not quite with us yet.  Meanwhile, there is plenty of documentation around for Firebird if you know
    where to look.  Study the Novices Guide and Knowledgebase pages at the Firebird website for links to
    papers and other documents to read on-line and/or download.</para>

    <para>Don't overlook the materials in the <firstterm>/bin</firstterm> directory of your
     Firebird installation.  In particular, make use of the Firebird 2.0 Quick Start Guide to help 
     you get started.</para>


      <section id="gn-docsproject"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>The <quote>Firebird Docs</quote> Project</title>
      <para>The Firebird Project has an integral user documentation project, a team of volunteers who are
      writing, editing and adapting user manuals, white papers and HowTos.  At the time of this release, the
      hard-working coordinator of the Docs project is Paul Vinkenoog.</para>

<!-- following paragraph and url changed in 2.0.1 -->
      <para>An index of available documents can be found in the
      <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=doc">on-line documentation index</ulink>. Published 
      docs currently include the essential <emphasis>Quick Start
      Guides</emphasis> for Firebird versions 1.5 and 2.0 in English and several other languages.</para>

      <para>For the official documentation we use a Docbook XML format for sources and build PDF and HTML
      output using a suite of Java utilities customised for our purposes.  These notes were developed and
      built under this system.</para>

      <para>Paul Vinkenoog has written comprehensive, easy-to-follow manuals for writing Firebird
      documentation and for using our tools.  You can find links to these manuals in the aforementioned index.
      New team members who want to do some writing or translating are always more than welcome.  For information 
      about the team's activities and progress you can visit the
      <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=devel&amp;sub=doc">Docs Project's homepage</ulink>.
      We have a lab forum for documenters and translators, firebird-docs, which you can join by visiting the
      <ulink url="http://www.firebirdsql.org/index.php?op=lists">Lists and Newsgroups page</ulink> at the
      Firebird web site.</para>
      </section>

      <section id="gn-currentdocs"><!-- Level 2 section -->
      <title>Your Main Documentation</title>
      <para>These release notes are your main documentation for Firebird 2.  However, if you are unfamiliar
      with previous Firebird versions, you will also need the release notes for Firebird 1.5.3.  For
      convenience, copies of both sets of release notes are included in the binary kits.  They will be
      installed in the /doc directory beneath the Firebird root directory.  Several other useful README
      documents are also installed there.</para>

      <para>For future reference, if you ever need to get a copy of the latest release notes
      <emphasis>before</emphasis> beginning installation, you can download them from the Firebird web site.
      The link can be found on the same page that linked you to the binary kits, towards the bottom of the
      page.</para>

      <para>If you do not own a copy of <emphasis>The Firebird Book</emphasis>, by Helen Borrie, then you will also
      need to find the beta documentation for InterBase&reg; 6.0.  It consists of several volumes in PDF
      format, of which the most useful will be the Language Reference (LangRef.pdf) and the Data Definition
      Guide (DataDef.pdf).  The Firebird Project is not allowed to distribute these documents but they are
      easily found at several download sites on the Web using Google and the search
      key &quot;LangRef.pdf&quot;.  When you find one, you usually find them all!</para>

      <para>--The Firebird Project</para>
      </section>
    </section>
  </chapter>